Relevant speeches for theme eu_GB and topic 3

I could not be more grateful for that intervention, and I will amplify the points that the right hon. Gentleman makes, because he is absolutely right. Have no doubt that there has been and continues to be diversion of trade due to the protocol. Article 16 exists in order that either party can take unilateral action to prevent that The Central Statistics Office Ireland reports that Republic of Ireland exports to Northern Ireland in the first four months of this year increased by 25% and by 40% relative to the first four months of 2019 and 2020. Northern Ireland exports to the Republic increased by 59% and 61% on the same comparison. Some are heralding that as the birth of an all-Ireland economy, but that is wholly contrary to the letter and spirit of the protocol The motion in my name continues by noting that “significant provisions of the Protocol remain subject to grace periods and have not yet been applied to trade from Great Britain to Northern Ireland and that there is no evidence that this has presented any significant risk to the EU internal market” Those grace periods, applying to chilled meats, medicines and the requirement of export health certificates, are intended to lapse in the coming months. The UK Government may choose to extend them, as we already have, with or without the EU’s permission, and they would be justified in doing so because the grace periods are not doing any harm, but that is not a long-term solution The Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Simon Coveney, says that the grace periods exist “to give supermarkets in particular, the opportunity to readjust their supply chains to adapt to” what he refers to as “these new realities”. I am afraid that confirms in the minds of many that the protocol is being used to create diversion of trade Diversion of trade as a goal can form no basis for the rebuilding of trust and public confidence in both communities in Northern Ireland. Article 6 of the protocol requires the EU and the UK to “use their best endeavours to facilitate the trade between Northern Ireland and other parts of the United Kingdom” I regret to say that, thus far, there is little evidence to suggest that the Republic of Ireland or the EU are attaching any importance to that vital commitment, and that is what is destroying trust The motion then states that this House “regards flexibility in the application of the Protocol as being in the mutual interests of the EU and UK, given the unique constitutional and political circumstances of Northern Ireland; regrets EU threats of legal action; notes the EU and UK have made a mutual commitment to adopt measures with a view to avoiding controls at the ports and airports of Northern Ireland to the extent possible; is conscious of the need to avoid separating the Unionist community from the rest of the UK, consistent with the Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement; and also recognises that Article 13(8) of the Protocol provides for potentially superior arrangements to those currently in place.” That is the real point of the motion: that the protocol is only one solution to the challenge of avoiding a hard border in Ireland while also respecting the integrity of the EU and UK internal markets There always was more than one way to skin a cat, and the EU agreed to that in article 13(8). Unfortunately, the EU seems implacably opposed to any discussion about how a subsequent agreement under article 13(8) of the protocol could supersede the protocol in whole or in part. Paragraph 25 of the political declaration accompanying the withdrawal agreement also envisaged: “Such facilitative arrangements and technologies will also be considered in alternative arrangements for ensuring the absence of a hard border on the island of Ireland.” Sadly, the protocol was not superseded by the trade and co-operation agreement, but now is the time for the EU to accept that its application of the protocol is not achieving its legitimate aims. Either the protocol must be changed by agreement or the UK must exercise its sovereign right to jettison the whole thing as a fundamental threat to peace and stability in Northern Ireland and to the integrity of the United Kingdom The EU could start by agreeing to an expanded category of goods that are not at risk of onward travel to the Republic of Ireland. We already have an authorised trader scheme for supermarkets; that could also be expanded, creating far less paperwork than there is now and a permanent exemption from unnecessary sanitary and phytosanitary checks. The EU could also agree to allow non-EU-compliant UK products to be imported into Northern Ireland if they are not at risk of moving into the rest of the EU internal market. The question is whether the EU is capable of being flexible and pragmatic, or whether it will continue to insist on imposing its rules, whatever the cost to peace and stability in Northern Ireland The noble Lord, Lord Trimble, was one of the two leaders who won the Nobel peace prize for negotiating the Belfast/Good Friday agreement. He has proposed a new solution: replacing the protocol with a system of mutual enforcement. This would mean that the UK and the EU would each ensure and guarantee that goods travelling across the shared border would be compliant with each other’s standards. Light checks would occur, but away from the border, and both sides would share relevant data on exports That proposal would remove the need for direct EU jurisdiction over Northern Ireland; Northern Ireland would be under UK law and fully restored as part of the UK internal market. It would ensure the absence of any new infrastructure on the border itself, it would guarantee the integrity of the EU internal market and, most importantly, it would accord equal respect to the concerns of both communities in Northern Ireland in a way that the present protocol utterly fails to do The proposal has not yet been tabled by the UK Government, but my understanding is that they broadly support the sentiments of the motion. Ideally, the EU would accept its obligations under paragraph 25 of the 2019 political declaration and agree in principle that the protocol will be superseded by these pragmatic and practical proposals We must hope that the EU lives up to its own ideals. Article 8 of the treaty on European Union obliges the EU to “develop a special relationship with neighbouring countries, aiming to establish an area of prosperity and good neighbourliness…based on cooperation.” If the EU refuses in principle even to open these discussions, the UK will have no option but to resort to article 16 of the protocol and take unilateral action. The world is watching how the EU is dealing with the United Kingdom.

We have delivered unfettered access from Northern Ireland to Great Britain. I appreciate that hon. Lady is talking about where we do have real challenges, with goods moving from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. There were flexibilities and vagueness, and some areas of the protocol, in terms of implementation, were not resolved. That was why we had the grace periods, why we had to extend the grace periods and why we now have the standstill. That is exactly why the EU’s offer, which it pretends provides flexibility, is a backwards step from where we are today; and it is why nobody in this House should accept it unless they are determined to do damage to Northern Ireland This legislation will fix the practical problems that the protocol has created in Northern Ireland. It will enable us to avoid a hard border, protect the integrity of the United Kingdom and safeguard the EU single market. The right hon. Member for Tottenham (Mr Lammy) spoke at some length—more than half an hour—in his opening remarks, and yet in the totality of those remarks we heard no plan, no proposal and no alternative from the Labour party, just words. The same goes for the hon. Member for Hove There were two interesting points, however. The right hon. Member for Tottenham raised Magna Carta to show the importance of treaties. He is right that Magna Carta is an important piece of our history, but he may want to recall that there were 63 clauses in it, and treaties evolve; that is why only four of them remain in place today. He also outlined, and I quote: “In our discussions, the DUP had consistently said that it wanted a negotiated settlement” I gently say to him that that seemed to be a surprise to all the DUP Members, so he learned something else—[Interruption.] He talks from a sedentary position, but he might want to check Hansard As I say, what we have heard is an outline of noise without any real proposals or any alternative. Many hon. Members, however, have raised important points around the question of legality, particularly my right hon. Friend the Member for Maidenhead (Mrs May) and my hon. Friends the Members for Bromley and Chislehurst (Sir Robert Neill) and for North Dorset (Simon Hoare). I can assure the House that this Bill is not just necessary, but lawful. Proceeding with this Bill is legal in international law and in support of our prior obligations to the Belfast/Good Friday agreement. The protocol is undermining all three strands of the Belfast/Good Friday agreement, as the right hon. Member for Lagan Valley (Sir Jeffrey M. Donaldson) well outlined, and the institutions that underpin it. It is the Government’s assessment that this Bill is currently the only way to provide the means to alleviate the socio-political conditions while continuing to support the protocol’s overall objectives of including and supporting north-south trade and co-operation, in the interests of both the EU and the UK, by ensuring that we protect its single market while protecting the UK’s internal market. These are all aspects of the Belfast/Good Friday agreement We recognise that necessity can only exceptionally be invoked in lawfully justified non-performance of international obligations, as was covered very eloquently by my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for South Swindon. This is a genuinely exceptional situation. It is only in the challenging, complex and unique circumstances in Northern Ireland that the Government have decided to bring forth this Bill. It has always been this Government’s position that should the operation of the protocol or withdrawal agreement be deemed to undermine the Belfast/Good Friday agreement, this would take precedence as the prior commitment under international law. That was outlined back in March 2019 by the then Attorney General and the then Secretary of State for the Department for Exiting the European Union. That was not just the understanding of the UK Government; it was the basis on which the protocol was agreed by both parties. The text of the protocol itself is clear that the Belfast/Good Friday agreement should be protected in all its parts. We should all take note of the important and powerful words of Lord Trimble, an architect of the Good Friday agreement Many colleagues have raised article 16. We have always reserved the right to take safeguarding measures under article 16 and have made the case that since the summer of last year, the threshold had been met. This Bill is the most effective, efficient and sustainable way to address the far-reaching problems that have arisen as a result of the application of the protocol. Article 16 in itself does not solve the problems in the way this Bill will. It is not only temporary but starts another process Hon. Members such as my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for South Swindon and my hon. Friend the Member for Stone (Sir William Cash) talked about the Northern Ireland Executive and Assembly. We have been clear with all parties in Northern Ireland that we do need to see, and I want to see, the Executive back up and running to deliver for the people of Northern Ireland. That has to be a priority for all of us. We want to see that Assembly and Executive as soon as possible. The people of Northern Ireland deserve a stable and accountable devolved Government who deliver on the issues that matter most to them. It is clear from comments today that this Bill is a key component that will see the Northern Ireland Executive and Assembly return, as we heard from the right hon. Members for East Antrim (Sammy Wilson) and for Lagan Valley. I think we can all welcome those comments. This Bill builds on that work. That is what I have heard in the conversations I have had in meeting all party leaders who want to see Stormont return The New Decade, New Approach agreement restored the devolved institutions after a three-year impasse, and we all need to work together to uphold the stability that it provided. We as a Government have a strong record in making sure that the institutions are up and running after too many years of hiatus. The New Decade, New Approach agreement, as set out in legislation, provides for a period of up to 24 weeks for Northern Ireland’s political representatives to restore functioning devolved institutions. I expect the parties to make full use of this time to engage with one another in earnest to restore fully functioning devolved institutions and to develop a programme of government that I have written to all the party leaders to encourage work on We do have a role on the international stage. The UK has shown what it stands for in the world, not just with rhetoric but with actions, through our extensive support of Ukraine, our unprecedented offer to those fleeing political instability in Hong Kong, and our leadership of international institutions that is demonstrated again this week at the G7 and NATO summits. We have led the way on climate change, as in so many other areas. That is why it is important, and we are focused on ensuring, that we are acting within the bounds of international law. Indeed, we have repeatedly emphasised that it is only the rare, exceptional circumstances in Northern Ireland that make this intervention necessary.

I am pleased to be able to speak in support of the Bill. Much has already been said and I do not want to repeat the points that have been made; rather, I want to set out why I believe the Bill will be good for Northern Ireland. I also want to sound a note of caution on those issues to which we will need to give some thought here in Westminster and in the Assembly, in order to ensure that we maximise the Bill’s impact on economic growth We are all aware of the need to rebalance the Northern Ireland economy. At the moment, we are more reliant than any other part of the United Kingdom on the public sector, and our private sector often struggles to be competitive because of particular disadvantages. For example, the private sector companies that compete internationally are often at a significant disadvantage because of energy costs. So there are a number of issues that put us at a competitive disadvantage compared with our nearest neighbours, but despite that, we are one of the best-performing regions in attracting foreign direct investment, and we do an excellent job of getting those companies to come to Northern Ireland One of the issues that corporation tax might assist us with is ensuring that with those companies come with not just back-office jobs but jobs with good salaries, and good profits that will then be out-turned and benefit the wider economy. So there are real opportunities to change the kind of foreign direct investment we can attract and to build on the reputation we have been able to grow overseas for being a good destination for investment As others have said, Northern Ireland is unique in having a land border with another country, the Republic of Ireland, which has a much lower rate of corporation tax. It is right that we should seek to be competitive with that country, but we should also not forget that we have other advantages that it may not. So we should not always seek simply to balance our taxes against its taxes; we should look to be competitive on a range of fronts. When companies are coming to make their investment, they will look at not only tax regimes, but a host of other issues that will influence their decision. I want to focus briefly on some of those towards the end of my remarks Devolving corporation tax rate-setting powers to the Northern Ireland Executive, when complemented by other measures, has the potential to help transform our economy, increasing growth, productivity and exports. So the Bill is a timely move to facilitate that growth. When the Northern Affairs Committee dealt with the issue, we found strongly that not only business, but local politicians, particularly those represented in the Executive but also some outside the Executive, were in favour of this measure. I must pay tribute to the hon. Member for East Antrim (Sammy Wilson), in that, although he has been sceptical about the issue, he has today given reasons why there needs to be caution about the fiscal modelling on which people have based their projections for the future. Although we may be able to address corporation tax, we cannot control the global economic picture, which will also dictate the amount of foreign direct investment we can achieve. So we should not set our sights too high in terms of the number of jobs that that may create. We have projections we can use as a basis and we can look at the evidence from other regions, but we have to accept that other factors will influence how big an impact this measure will have It is important that we weigh those factors carefully when setting the rate—that will be a matter for the Assembly, which will need to give them due consideration. I agree with other Members who have said that we would want to do that quickly, I also think we need to carry out due diligence in setting the rate, to ensure that we know exactly what it will cost the Northern Ireland Assembly in block grant and exactly how we will manage the bridging period between making the cut to the block grant and seeing some reward from the economic investment that will follow. We will also need carefully to examine the long-term impact this measure will have on the wider economy. So although it is good that we are making these moves today—I commend the Secretary of State and her team for upholding their part of the Stormont House agreement at this stage, while, almost simultaneously, the Assembly is today upholding one of its parts of the agreement on the budget issues—I hope we will see an opportunity for the Assembly to take more responsibility over its financial measures I also wish to commend the Secretary of State for her work on the Bill, which will ensure that if the Assembly does not show a responsible way forward on the budget and if we are not able to get our finances in order in the next few years, this move will not go ahead. It is quite simple: we cannot continue with a situation where we make promises beyond the money we have to fulfil them and where we make commitments on public sector expenditure that are not covered by the block grant or by revenue raising that is available to us already. We need to get our financial house in order, so that we are able not only to make the corporation tax reduction, but convince the people of Northern Ireland that we have the capability to manage our finances in a way that is for their benefit. There is a gap between what the politicians would like to be able to do and what the Northern Ireland public trust them to do, particularly on financial matters. That gap needs to be closed quickly over the next few years, by dealing with the budgetary matters before the Assembly both today and over the next few weeks It is important that after the Stormont House agreement we have bought some more time in which to be able to make those transformations to the economy, but all parties will have difficult decisions to make. Where the money comes from to pay for the corporation tax devolution will be one of a number of difficult decisions that will have to be taken. Whatever the colour of the Westminster Government after the next election, it is clear that nobody is arriving with a pot of gold and none of us can expect that huge amounts of money will be available that are not available now for public sector investment. I accept that some in this House wish it were otherwise It is hugely important for us to be realistic in our projections and in the promises we make to the public we represent, and to recognise that corporation tax is only one of a number of avenues we can pursue to grow our private sector. A low rate of corporation tax alone will not attract all the investment needed to grow Northern Ireland’s economy. Other corresponding measures will need to be taken in order to make Northern Ireland an attractive place in which to base a business or company, so let me briefly discuss some of them. Some are relevant to Westminster, whereas others will ultimately be dealt with by the Assembly. It is important for us to consider them, because that mix will allow companies to have the confidence to come to Northern Ireland The first and foremost issue is stability and good governance. The Stormont House agreement offered us an opportunity to deal with some of the issues associated with political stability, but, as hon. Members know from my response, I believe many of those were, unfortunately, parked and could still be the undoing of the good progress made thus far. I want local parties to commit to dealing maturely with those issues, which are politically sensitive, so that we do not have the kind of situation we have had recently, where lots of years of talking to companies and encouraging them to come to Northern Ireland and consider us as an inward investment opportunity are written off on the basis of a few nights of rioting, which is projected worldwide and damages our reputation irrevocably We need to have stability and maturity around political decision making. The opportunity is there for that to happen, and I hope that all parties will grasp it. They should stop the petty arguments over peripheral issues and try to pull together to create the sort of stability that is beneficial for business, public sector growth, and small and medium-sized enterprises. Those SMEs suffer greatly when we have traffic disruptions as a result of bomb alerts and bomb hoaxes. Such an incident happened in my constituency just this week. The whole city, including the train service and local roads, was brought to a standstill. We cannot afford for that to continue, so we must deal with the politics to bring about that stability We also need to ensure that there is good governance. As I have said, the Stormont House agreement has given us an opportunity to look at right-sizing our civil service and to do so in a way that will not force people into compulsory redundancy. That agreement was good for Northern Ireland, but we still have to find other employment for people, which is where corporation tax could play an important role There are other issues to consider. Members have mentioned infrastructure and planning, and, as a civil engineer, it would be wrong of me not to address that matter. We need not just significant investment in that area, but reform, because we cannot deliver the infrastructure investments that are needed in Northern Ireland with the current amount of money that we receive from the block grant and the emphasis that the Assembly gives to the matter. Some restructuring will be required if we are to ensure that our infrastructure is not an impediment to further economic growth We also need to consider issues of connectivity. The challenge rests not just with the Northern Ireland Assembly, but with the Treasury and other Departments here at Westminster. The hon. Member for East Antrim mentioned the fact that, for a long time, Northern Ireland was a driver for the UK economy. In my constituency, we had the largest shipyard anywhere in these islands and the world’s largest roadworks. We were not in any way regarded as peripheral because, at that time, connectivity was largely through ports, and we had an excellent port in Belfast. The situation has now changed and most of our exports go by plane. We are reliant on air transport. Heathrow is the main cargo hub for the UK and the main cargo export point for goods and services going from Northern Ireland. Unless we resolve the situation at Heathrow, no amount of reduction in corporation tax will encourage people to invest in Northern Ireland We need to retain our connectivity to London, and also through London and beyond to other business destinations so that we are not remote for those who wish to come and invest and do business in Northern Ireland. It is crucial that decisions about airport and runway capacity in the south-east are resolved, because it is a matter of importance for the country as a whole and for Northern Ireland in particular. Being on an island and off an island, we are absolutely reliant on air transport for our connectivity It would be remiss of me not to mention air passenger duty since I have repeatedly complained about it. We are double taxed with air passenger duty, which has an impact on our connectivity and on the cost of doing business. Although the problem needs to be addressed UK wide, it has a much greater impact on Northern Ireland than on any other region. We have no alternative way to make our way to London, to the main hub, other than to use air transport, and we are penalised for that because of the lack of through carriers. We have to pay air passenger duty twice: once to get to London and then onwards to whatever destination we take Another area of concern is brass plating, which the Bill tries to address. Northern Ireland does not want to become simply a front for companies that are doing business elsewhere and creating economic growth and employment elsewhere but benefiting from the low tax regime in Northern Ireland. There is no benefit to us or to the UK from that. We want to encourage companies that will set up their main operations in Northern Ireland and create employment and real economic growth. Those companies will not be the only ones to benefit; all of the firms that service those companies that pay the corporation tax will also potentially benefit from being able to attract those larger companies in. It is important that we deal with actual economic activity, and I welcome the fact that work has been done on that Another brass-plating issue of interest to me and to the hon. Member for Foyle (Mark Durkan) is international tax transparency. I do not want to stand over any system that would allow people from other regions to create a false front in Northern Ireland that would result in money being taken out of other economies in need of funds, whether they are in the third world or other parts of our own country. That is not good for international development, and it is important that there is tax transparency at the heart of the measure. We want real investment and real economic growth, and we want real jobs to be created as a result. I am glad that that has been acknowledged and considered in the Bill Something else that is required is skills. If we do not have the right skill set we will not be able to attract the quality jobs that we seek to attract, and it is hugely important that we do that. My colleague, Dr Stephen Farry, is doing that very effectively through the Department for Employment and Learning, and there is a mechanism that would allow a small levy—about 0.6%—to be placed on those companies that benefit from the corporation tax reduction. The levy could be ring-fenced to pay for skills investment. Companies could draw down some of that money for in-house training and partnership training with universities, and the remainder could be used for other skills investment. That should be a consideration in the way in which the Bill is structured. No one will want to benefit from our tax laws if they have to pay something towards investment in skills unless they intend to have employment and training as part of the work they do when they come to Northern Ireland. Those are the kind of added-value jobs that we need and want, and some form of skills levy would be helpful to avoid brass-plating and to support the Executive’s emphasis on skills investment and development Finally, the Chairman of the Select Committee on Northern Ireland Affairs, the hon. Member for Tewkesbury (Mr Robertson), discussed the importance of differentiation in Europe as a way of attracting new business to Northern Ireland. People come to Northern Ireland because they see it as a good stop-off point between, for example, the US, the south American countries and the European Union. They see us as a gateway to European markets. When we debate the European Union in Parliament let us not forget that many of those who locate their businesses in Belfast, Derry and other places do so because they see Northern Ireland as part of the EU and a good way to make those connections. We need to be careful when we talk about withdrawing from the EU—I have no problem with differentiation within the EU—as we need to be conscious of the impact that that would have, despite what we may do on tax regimes All those things are important. Some of them are in the gift of Westminster; some are in the gift of the Assembly. However, we have taken an important first step with this Second Reading. As we proceed with a detailed consideration of the Bill I trust that we can look at how we ensure that we experience the maximum benefit in Northern Ireland. I stress again that unless we have a stable, integrated future in Northern Ireland it will not be an attractive place for large businesses. When the due diligence is done, one of the most important considerations is stability. We need to create that stability as a starting point, and from there this measure will give us an opportunity to make prosperity part of the package that the peace process can deliver.

