Relevant speeches for theme healthcare_GB and topic 2

It is a pleasure to be back at the Dispatch Box for the second time today to help Back Benchers from all parties in their quest to represent their constituents I particularly commend the hon. Member for Ceredigion (Mr Williams), whose birthday it is today. That he is here shows his dedication. My hon. Friends the Members for Southend West (Sir David Amess) and for Congleton (Fiona Bruce) will also be celebrating their birthdays over the weekend. I welcome the return of the pre-recess Adjournment debate—[Hon. Members: “Hear, hear!”] It is a splendid tradition and I am delighted that people can come here and raise a wide variety of issues. It was ably started by my hon. Friend the Member for Harrow East (Bob Blackman), affectionately known as Bobbhai. He is one of several apprentices to my hon. Friend the Member for Southend West in that he tried to cover as many topics as possible. He will recognise that the lift at Stanmore station is a matter for the Mayor of London, our hon. Friend the Member for Uxbridge and South Ruislip (Boris Johnson), and Transport for London. I understand that my hon. Friend the Member for Harrow East has raised the concern with TfL many times, so I suggest that he grabs the Mayor in the Lobby when we vote on the Finance Bill on the Monday we return. The station’s ramp for wheelchair users technically meets the requirements for step-free access, but I appreciate that it is steep My hon. Friend was right to praise the redevelopment of the Royal National Orthopaedic hospital, which does great work. I understand that the trust’s board will, I hope, approve the plans, which will then be submitted to NHS Improvement for review. It is very much a priority project for the Department of Health and NHS Improvement. I was pleased that he paid tribute to the rebuilding of several schools; it is good to see that the Government are investing in the future of children in Harrow. He made particular reference to the first voluntary-aided Hindu school, which parents will welcome My hon. Friend also talked about the blue badge scheme. The criteria for obtaining a blue badge have been tightened significantly. It is not based on a particular kind of disability, but if someone’s disability means that they cannot walk a certain distance and their walking is sufficiently affected, they should be deemed eligible. I am sure that he will work with his constituents on that As for the tobacco tax, the price of a typical pack of cigarettes already contains over £5 in duty. In Budget 2014, it was announced that the escalator of RPI plus 2% would continue into this Parliament. The Treasury is also taking action to reduce the gap in duty between hand-rolling tobacco and cigarettes. I am sure that my hon. Friend will welcome both those measures because high duty rates are a proven way of reducing the prevalence of smoking and help to meet the objectives of protecting public health The right hon. Member for Leicester East (Keith Vaz) mentioned Yemen, which certainly matters to this country. The emerging Daesh in Yemen and al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula are exploiting the current situation. The Government are not prepared to stand back and let that continue, but they believe that a political solution is the best way of bringing long-term stability to Yemen. There are encouraging reports of co-operation between the Saudis and the Houthis, who have agreed a cessation of hostilities on the Saudi-Yemen border, improved humanitarian access, prisoner exchanges and mine clearance. Last week, the Saudi Arabian-led coalition said that it intended to scale back military operations in Yemen. In the same vein, I applaud and support the work of the UN special envoy for Yemen, who says that he is ready to relaunch political talks in the coming weeks. The UK effort should be focused on supporting the UN, and encouraging the parties to engage constructively and implement the commitments made. The right hon. Gentleman also referred to aspects of the sugar tax and the availability of products in this place, and I suggest that he may want speak to the Administration Committee. I am sure that there are a lot of cheers for the momentous season that the Leicester City foxes have had so far, and I am sure they would be a popular winner of the premier league if they were able to continue their great success. I have to say that they are doing much better than my team, Liverpool. He referred to a specific situation relating to diabetes programmes in Leicester. I am not aware of the details of that, but I am sure he is capable, as he has shown in the past, of taking that up appropriately with the Health Secretary. May I also congratulate the right hon. Gentleman on the Tiffin cup? This is the first year that I will be making a nomination, and I hope we will be successful Let me move on to the tour de force that is my hon. Friend the Member for Southend West. He is a class act, and other Members are starting to learn from him. He finished his contribution with a tribute to Her Majesty the Queen in the year of her 90th birthday. I can assure him that there will be ample time in this House to pay tributes in due course, but activities such as Clean for the Queen have been very successful On c2c, the Government accept that the December timetable changes have had a big impact on c2c passengers and their journeys. As my hon. Friend said, the Under-Secretary of State for Transport, my hon. Friend the Member for Devizes (Claire Perry), who has responsibility for rail, asked c2c to undertake a review of the stopping pattern of the services into London. I want to assure him that officials in the Department for Transport will continue to work closely with c2c to ensure that appropriate changes are delivered and that an appropriate balance is achieved in respect of crowding and service levels On fire safety, the Under-Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government, my hon. Friend the Member for Stockton South (James Wharton) wrote to my hon. Friend the Member for Southend West recently, explaining that he is considering a number of the issues that he had raised about building regulations. I am also pleased that he has had the chance to speak to the Minister for Schools about automatic fire sprinklers in schools I am aware of the concerns my hon. Friend the Member for Southend West has about the potential change in responsibilities involving police and crime commissioners, but I want him to be assured that those matters will be considered carefully if any changes are made. On Chilcot, we have all been waiting a long time for that report, and I hope it will not be too much longer before we have it. Sir John Chilcot and my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister exchanged letters in October. My hon. Friend will be aware that my right hon. Friend is exceptionally frustrated at how long this has taken, but it is an independent inquiry and an independent report, and the Government cannot direct when it will be published I congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Southend West on piloting a private Member’s Bill successfully through this House. It just shows that a good, sensible piece of legislation that does not try to achieve too much but does something that matters can successfully gain the support of the House. In this case, it was a deregulatory measure and I wish it well in the Lords, with the hope that it will receive Royal Assent. On the alternative city of culture, I think that, as has already been alluded to, Grimsby is trying to become the fringe zone for it—I think it is stretching it a little far in terms of getting to Southend. Knowing my hon. Friend and the people of Southend, they will not let anything stand in the way. It sounds as if they have a really exciting programme, which I may well take advantage of next year. I am hoping to go to Southend in the near future—I must admit that it will be to campaign for my friend Alex Bright, who is running in the Southchurch ward. I say friend, as he is that, but he also works for me as my secretary, and I am sure he will do well My hon. Friend the Member for Southend West has a long history of championing animal welfare, and he will be aware that there are already laws in place that enforcement agencies can use to ensure the welfare of pet animals. However, the Government accept that the legislation needs updating, and there has been a consultation, to which we received about 1,500 responses. They will have to be analysed before any decisions are made, but this is not just about changing the law; it is also about working with key stakeholders to improve people’s understanding. He then tackled a number of issues connected with health, including the health summits. I should point out that the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency is the competent authority in this area, and although the Government may wish to encourage particular thoughts along certain lines, the agency is independent and needs to come up with appropriate evidence On salt, the data published this week by Public Health England showed that adult salt intake in England has decreased by more than 10% in the past decade. My hon. Friend is right that the UK is leading the world on salt reduction, and I will work with industry on voluntary reductions in salt levels by up to 50% in everyday products, such as ketchup, bread and baked beans On meningitis, my thoughts are with the family of my hon. Friend’s constituent. I recognise that this is a serious disease. He referred to the e-petition, and I know that the matter will be debated further in April Fuel poverty is a really important matter, and I recognise that my hon. Friend piloted a private Member’s Bill on to the statute book when he was in Opposition some years ago. The Government are serious about helping vulnerable people to heat their homes, and the Department is putting in place measures that are needed to meet our ambitious target for fuel poverty, requiring us to bring as many fuel-poor homes as reasonably practicable up to the band C energy efficiency standard by 2030 My hon. Friend was right to praise what happened in the Budget on business rates. With regard to the Maldives, the UK is not alone in its concern about the sustained decline of democracy and judicial independence, but I am sure that he will make his points directly to the Minister The upcoming world humanitarian summit will provide a once-in-a-generation opportunity for the global community to come together and agree on how to serve those most left behind by conflict, extreme poverty and environmental change. My right hon. Friend the International Development Secretary has placed support for women and girls at the heart of her Department’s work, and the UK supports proposals to ensure that women are involved in planning and decision making during responses to humanitarian emergencies. The hon. Member for Ceredigion (Mr Williams) raised a challenging case. I will not pretend that I can give him any assurances here today, but I will refer the matter to the Home Secretary to see whether there is anything that can be done I am sure that my hon. Friend the Member for Cleethorpes (Martin Vickers) and the hon. Member for Great Grimsby (Melanie Onn) will be going down Wembley Way together singing, “We’re on our way to Wembley”. He referred to the Greater Lincolnshire deal and Transport for the North. I think that there is a real opportunity with that devolution deal to make some of the changes to which he refers. I recognise his points about rail connectivity, and he was generous in accepting that work will be undertaken on the A160 and the A180, which will help Immingham, but I will pass his comments to the Department for Transport and ask Ministers there to reply The hon. Member for Ross, Skye and Lochaber (Ian Blackford) referred to early-day motion 1235. I am not aware that the usual channels have yet been activated for a debate on the statutory instrument to which he refers, so he may wish to take that up with the hon. Member for Angus (Mike Weir), who also has a birthday today. Specifically, UK state pensions are payable worldwide and uprated abroad where we have a legal requirement to do so—for example in the European economic area or in countries in which there are reciprocal agreements. That has been a long-standing policy of successive Governments for about 70 years, and the Government have no plans to change the policy My hon. Friend the Member for Stafford (Jeremy Lefroy) started with a strong proclamation of his Christian faith. I want to flag up the fact that I am delighted that he and his colleagues on the International Development Committee had a successful visit to Nigeria. DFID is committed to drawing 1 million more children into education in northern Nigeria by 2020. He referred to the sports fields at Shugborough Hall. He should recognise that Sport England is a statutory consultee on all planning applications affecting playing fields, and he may wish to approach it himself. In relation to the Hopton tunnel, there is a proposal to replace it with a false cutting. When compared with the green tunnel, the proposed false cutting would bring a substantial reduction in the footprint required to construct and operate HS2, as well as a reduction in the height of the structure My hon. Friend the Member for Congleton (Fiona Bruce) was exceptionally eloquent in her proposals for an eastern bypass around Middlewich. It is good to hear that she is working with her council and the local enterprise partnership. She made a compelling case in her bid for the local majors fund, especially recognising the access to Crewe. She is due to meet the Under-Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government, my hon. Friend the Member for Stockton South (James Wharton), but I strongly recommend that she meets the Minister of State, Department for Transport. I hope that she succeeds in her compelling case for housing—as I hope that I will succeed in the case that I will put forward—[Interruption.] It is for the Suffolk Energy Gateway bypass Finally, my hon. Friend the Member for Eastleigh (Mims Davies) covered a wide range of topics. To get results, she urged people to vote blue to get green. She is right; she is an excellent MP, making that difference. She talked about apprenticeships, and I will pass on her comments to the appropriate Minister, and I know that she has already met my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Health about GPs. In terms of International Women’s Day, it is right that she gets the credit Finally, it has been a pleasure working with the hon. Member for Great Grimsby, and I thank her for that. I thank all the civil servants for helping in this debate, and I wish everybody a happy Easter Question put and agreed to. Resolved, That this House has considered matters to be raised before the forthcoming adjournment.

We now come to the presentation of Bills. As the House can see—I do not think I have seen this many people in the Chamber for a very long time—we have a good many Bills to be presented today. In order to save time and to get on with today’s main business, for Members presenting more than one consecutive Bill, I will accept private notice of the dates of Second Reading for those Bills. These dates will be minuted accordingly in Hansard and in Votes and Proceedings. For Members presenting individual Bills, they will name the date for Second Reading as usual Registers of Births and Deaths Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Saqib Bhatti presented a Bill to make provision about the keeping and maintenance of registers of births and deaths; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 26 November, and to be printed (Bill 34). Mental Health Provision (Children and Young People) Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Munira Wilson presented a Bill to require the Government to report annually to Parliament on mental health provision for children and young people Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 18 March 2022, and to be printed (Bill 35). Asylum Seekers (Permission to Work) Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Carol Monaghan, supported by Martin Docherty-Hughes, Patrick Grady, Anum Qaisar-Javed, David Linden, Stewart Malcolm McDonald, Stuart C McDonald, Anne McLaughlin, Angus Brendan MacNeil, Chris Stephens, Alison Thewliss and Owen Thompson, presented a Bill to make provision for granting permission to work to asylum seekers who have waited six months for a decision on their asylum application; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 3 December, and to be printed (Bill 36). Miniature Mobile Phones (Prohibition of Sale) Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sarah Atherton presented a Bill to prohibit the sale of miniature mobile phones; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 37). Domestic Building Works (Consumer Protection) Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mark Garnier, supported by Mr Steve Baker, Anthony Mangnall, David Morris, Kelly Tolhurst, Caroline Nokes, Jake Berry, Emma Hardy and Fleur Anderson, presented a Bill to make provision about consumer protection in relation to domestic building works; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 19 November, and to be printed (Bill 38). Unsolicited Explicit Images And Deepfake Pornography Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Angela Richardson presented a Bill to create the offences of sending unsolicited explicit digital images and of producing digitally-altered images or videos in which an individual is depicted pornographically without their consent; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 4 February 2022, and to be printed (Bill 39). Local Authority Boundaries (Referendums) Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Robbie Moore, supported by Philip Davies, presented a Bill to make provision to enable parliamentary constituency areas to form new unitary local authority areas if agreed by referendum; to make provision for such referendums; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 25 February 2022, and to be printed (Bill 40). Approved Premises (Substance Testing) Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Rob Butler presented a Bill to make provision about substance testing in approved premises and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 29 October, and to be printed (Bill 41). Prime Minister (Temporary Replacement) Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to make provision for the carrying out of the functions of the Prime Minister in the event that a Prime Minister, or a person temporarily carrying out the functions of the Prime Minister, is incapacitated; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 14 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 42) British Goods (Public Sector Purchasing Duty) Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) John Spellar presented a Bill to place a duty on public bodies to have a presumption in favour of purchasing goods of British origin in purchasing decisions; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 43). Covid-19 Vaccine Damage Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to require the Secretary of State to establish an independent review of disablement caused by Covid-19 vaccinations and the adequacy of the compensation offered to persons so disabled; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 44). Employment Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Martin Docherty-Hughes, supported by Chris Stephens, presented a Bill to make provision about the rights of workers, including to negotiate pay and join trade unions and employee associations; to amend the definition of worker; to make provision about the employment rights of members of the armed forces; to make provision about employee representatives on company boards; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 45). Corporate Homicide Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to amend the Corporate Manslaughter and Corporate Homicide Act 2007 to make provision about the offence of corporate homicide; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 46). Public Advocate Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Maria Eagle, supported by Sir George Howarth, Derek Twigg, Alison McGovern, Dame Angela Eagle, Peter Dowd, Bill Esterson, Conor McGinn, Dan Carden, Ian Byrne, Paula Barker and Kim Johnson, presented a Bill to establish a public advocate to provide advice to, and act as data controller for, representatives of the deceased after major incidents Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 47). Paternity (Leave and Pay) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Gareth Davies presented a Bill to extend eligibility for paternity leave and pay; to make provision for more flexibility in the timing of, and notice period for, paternity leave; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 29 October, and to be printed (Bill 48). Goods Delivery Services Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Jamie Stone presented a Bill to regulate charges for, and the advertising of, goods delivery services; to make provision about transport infrastructure in remote areas to promote the use of goods delivery services; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 18 March, and to be printed (Bill 49). Public Bodies (Representation from Devolved Nations) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Wendy Chamberlain presented a Bill to require the Government to have regard to the desirability of boards of public bodies including at least one person with relevant experience in at least one of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 26 November, and to be printed (Bill 50). Education Employment (Accompaniment to Hearings) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Brendan Clarke-Smith, supported by Andrew Lewer, Andrew Percy, Caroline Ansell, Damian Hinds, Jonathan Gullis, Jim Shannon, Robert Halfon, Scott Benton, Selaine Saxby, Tim Loughton and Virginia Crosby, presented a Bill to provide that teachers and other education staff may choose to be accompanied to disciplinary or grievance hearings by a person other than a trade union representative or colleague; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 51). Clean Air Targets (World Health Organization Guidelines) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Christine Jardine presented a Bill to require United Kingdom clean air targets to comply with World Health Organization guidelines; to require the Secretary of State to report annually to Parliament on that compliance; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 52). Energy Pricing Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Martyn Day, supported by Margaret Ferrier, Marion Fellows, John Mc Nally, Ronnie Cowan and Douglas Chapman, presented a Bill to prohibit the practice of offering preferential energy tariffs to new customers compared to existing customers; to place further restrictions on energy pricing; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 53). Commercial Rent (Prohibition of Upward-Only Reviews) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Sarah Olney presented a Bill to prohibit the use of upward-only rent review clauses in commercial rent agreements; to nullify existing such clauses; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 18 March 2022, and to be printed (Bill 54). City of Bradford (Referendum on Shipley and Keighley)Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Philip Davies, supported by Robbie Moore, presented a Bill to make provision for a district-wide referendum in the City of Bradford Metropolitan District Council area on the continued inclusion of the areas covered by the Shipley and Keighley parliamentary constituencies in that district; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 25 February 2022, and to be printed (Bill 55). Wellbeing of Future Generations (No. 2) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Simon Fell presented a Bill to make provision for a public consultation to inform a set of national wellbeing goals; to require public bodies to act in pursuit of the United Kingdom’s environmental, social, economic and cultural wellbeing by meeting wellbeing objectives, publishing future generations impact assessments and accounting for preventative spending; to establish a futures and forecasting report; to establish a Commission for Future Generations for the United Kingdom; to extend the duty of the Office of Budget Responsibility to consider wellbeing and the future generations principle in their work; to add onto a Minister in each government department’s portfolio a duty to promote the future generations principle across government policy; to establish a Joint Parliamentary Committee on Future Generations; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 56). Conversion Therapy (Prohibition) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Wera Hobhouse presented a Bill to prohibit sexual orientation and gender identity conversion therapy; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 18 March 2022, and to be printed (Bill 57). Pedicabs (London) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Nickie Aiken, supported by Felicity Buchan, Florence Eshalomi, David Simmonds and Ms Karen Buck, presented a Bill to provide for the regulation of the carrying of passengers in Greater London by pedal cycles and power-assisted pedal cycles for hire or reward; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 19 November, and to be printed (Bill 58). Employment (Caring Leave) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Jack Brereton presented a Bill to give employees who are unpaid carers the right to one week’s unpaid leave for caring purposes; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 4 February 2022, and to be printed (Bill 59). Palestine Statehood (Recognition) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Layla Moran, supported by Ed Davey, Stephen Farry, Sarah Champion, Andy Slaughter, Alyn Smith, Caroline Lucas and Claire Hanna, presented a Bill to make provision in connection with the recognition of the State of Palestine Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 18 March 2022, and to be printed (Bill 60). Climate and Ecology Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Caroline Lucas, supported by Barry Gardiner, Alan Brown, Ed Davey, Liz Saville Roberts, Claire Hanna, Stephen Farry, Clive Lewis, Alex Sobel, Brendan O’Hara, Sarah Olney and Ben Lake, presented a Bill to require the United Kingdom to achieve climate and nature targets; to give the Secretary of State a duty to implement a strategy to achieve those targets; to establish a Climate and Nature Assembly to advise the Secretary of State in creating that strategy; to give duties to the Committee on Climate Change and the Joint Nature Conservation Committee regarding the strategy and targets; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 61). Non-Disclosure Agreements Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Mrs Maria Miller presented a Bill to restrict the use of non-disclosure agreements; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 3 December, and to be printed (Bill 62). Tips Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Dean Russell presented a Bill to prohibit employers retaining tips and gratuities intended for staff; to make provision about the division of tips and gratuities between staff; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 63). Education (16 to 19 Academies) (Religious Character)Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Scott Benton presented a Bill to permit 16 to 19 academies to have a designated religious character; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 29 October, and to be printed (Bill 64). Kinship Care (Parental Leave) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Katherine Fletcher presented a Bill to make provision about parental leave for kinship carers who take on responsibility for children whose parents are unable to care for them; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 14 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 65). Miscarriage Leave Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Angela Crawley presented a Bill to make provision for paid leave for people who have experienced miscarriage Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 3 December, and to be printed (Bill 66). Crown Estate (Devolution to Wales) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Liz Saville Roberts, supported by Hywel Williams and Ben Lake, presented a Bill to devolve management of the Crown Estate and its assets in Wales to the Welsh Government; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 29 October, and to be printed (Bill 67). Electric Vehicle Charging Points (New Buildings) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No.57) Felicity Buchan presented a Bill to make provision about electric vehicle charging points in new buildings; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 68). Electoral Commission (Abolition) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to abolish the Electoral Commission; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 26 November, and to be printed (Bill 69). Hospitals (Parking Charges and Business Rates) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to prohibit charging for car parking at NHS Hospitals for patients and visitors; to make provision for NHS Hospitals to be exempt from business rates; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 70). Human Trafficking (Child Protection) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to make provision for the creation of secure safe houses for children that have been subject to human trafficking; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 21 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 71). General Election (Leaders’ Debates) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to set up a commission to make arrangements for debates between leaders of political parties during a General Election; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 72). Homeless People (Current Accounts) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to require banks to provide current accounts for homeless people seeking work; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 73). Electoral Candidates (Age) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to allow a person who is age 18 or older on the day of a parliamentary or local election to stand as candidate; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 74). Prime Minister (Accountability to House of Commons) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to impose duties on the Prime Minister relating to accountability to the House of Commons; to require the Prime Minister to be available to answer questions in that House on at least two occasions during a sitting week except in specified circumstances; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 4 February 2022, and to be printed (Bill 75). Voter Registration Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to prohibit persons from being registered to vote in Parliamentary elections at more than one address; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 76). North Northamptonshire (Urgent Care Facilities) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to make provision about the restructuring of urgent care facilities in North Northamptonshire; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 18 March 2022, and to be printed (Bill 77). Business of the House Commission Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to create a Business of the House Commission to regulate the timetabling of business in the House of Commons; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 28 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 78). Asylum Seekers (Return to Safe Countries) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to require asylum seekers who have arrived in the United Kingdom from a safe country to be immediately returned to that country; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 79). BBC Licence Fee (Abolition) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to abolish the BBC licence fee and make the BBC a subscription service; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 29 October, and to be printed (Bill 80). Human Trafficking (Sentencing) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to make provision about penalties for human trafficking offences Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 25 February 2022, and to be printed (Bill 81). Leader of the House of Commons (Election) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to amend the House of Commons Administration Act 1978 to provide that the Prime Minister may only nominate as Leader of the House of Commons a Member of that House who is from the governing party and is elected by a system in which all Members of the House of Commons may participate; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 19 November, and to be printed (Bill 82). Motor Vehicles (Compulsory Insurance) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mr Peter Bone presented a Bill to amend retained EU law relating to compulsory insurance for the use of motor vehicles; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 83). Consumer Pricing Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) John Spellar presented a Bill to prohibit the practice of offering preferential pricing to new customers compared to existing customers; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 84). Broadcasting (Listed Sporting Events) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) John Spellar presented a Bill to expand the list of sporting events that must be made available for broadcast by free-to-air television channels; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 85). Puppy Import (Prohibition) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) John Spellar presented a Bill to prohibit the import of young puppies; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 86). Employment (Application Requirements) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) John Spellar presented a Bill to regulate the use of minimum qualification or experience requirements in job applications; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 87). Public Sector Website Impersonation Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) John Spellar presented a Bill to create an offence of impersonating a public sector website for the purpose of collecting payment or personal data; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 88). Hunting Trophy Import (Prohibition) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) John Spellar presented a Bill to prohibit the import of wild animal specimens derived from trophy hunting; and for connected purposes. Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 89). Armenian Genocide (Recognition) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) John Spellar presented a Bill to require Her Majesty’s Government to formally recognise the Armenian genocide of 1915-16 Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 90). House of Lords (Hereditary Peers) (Abolition of By-Elections) (No. 2) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) John Spellar presented a Bill to amend the House of Lords Act 1999 so as to abolish the system of by-elections for hereditary peers Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 91). Public Health (Control of Disease) Act 1984 (Amendment) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to amend the Public Health (Control of Disease) Act 1984 to make provision about Parliamentary scrutiny of regulations made under that Act; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 29 October, and to be printed (Bill 92). Caravan Site Licensing (Exemptions of Motor Homes) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to exempt motor homes from caravan site licensing requirements; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 29 October, and to be printed (Bill 93). NHS England (Alternative Treatment) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to make provision about arranging alternative non-NHS England treatment for patients who have waited for more than one year for hospital treatment; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 19 November, and to be printed (Bill 94). Channel 4 (Privatisation) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to make provision for the privatisation of Channel 4; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 95). British Broadcasting Corporation (Privatisation) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to make provision for the privatisation of the British Broadcasting Corporation; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 96). Children’s Clothing (Value Added Tax) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to extend the definition of children’s clothing for the purposes of exemption from VAT; to extend the VAT exemption to further categories of school uniform; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 19 November, and to be printed (Bill 97). BBC Licence Fee Non-Payment (Decriminalisation for Over-75s) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to decriminalise the non-payment of the BBC licence fee by persons aged over seventy five; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 29 October, and to be printed (Bill 98). Regulatory Impact Assessments Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to require a Regulatory Impact Assessment to be published for all primary and secondary legislation introduced by the Government; to make provision for associated sanctions; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 14 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 99). Barnett Formula (Replacement) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to require the Chancellor of the Exchequer to report to Parliament on proposals to replace the Barnett Formula used to calculate adjustments to public expenditure allocated to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland with a statutory scheme for the allocation of resources based on an assessment of relative needs; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 21 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 100). NHS (Prohibition of Data Transfer) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to prohibit the transfer of personal data by the NHS without the authority of the data subject; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 4 February 2022, and to be printed (Bill 101). Mobile Homes Act 1983 (Amendment) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to amend the Mobile Homes Act 1983; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 28 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 102). Rule of Law (Enforcement by Public Authorities) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to require public authorities to exercise their statutory powers to investigate and take enforcement action for breaches of the law; to make provision for sanctions for failing to take such action; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 25 February 2022 , and to be printed (Bill 103). Illegal Immigration (Offences) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57)s Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to create offences in respect of persons who have entered the UK illegally or who have remained in the UK without legal authority; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 26 November, and to be printed (Bill 104). National Health Service Co-Funding and Co-Payment Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to make provision for co-funding and for the extension of co-payment for NHS services in England; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 4 February 2022, and to be printed (Bill 105). Caravan Sites Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to amend the requirements for caravan site licence applications made under the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 29 October, and to be printed (Bill 106). Public Sector Exit Payments (Limitation) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to limit exit payments made by some public sector organisations to employees; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 107). Green Belt (Protection) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Sir Christopher Chope presented a Bill to establish a national register of Green Belt land in England; to restrict the ability of local authorities to de-designate Green Belt land; to make provision about future development of de-designated Green Belt land and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 29 October, and to be printed (Bill 108). Workers (Employment Security and Definition) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Martin Docherty-Hughes, supported by Chris Stephens, presented a Bill to make provision about employment security and the rights of workers; to amend the definition of worker; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 109). Workers (Rights and Definition) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to make provision about workers’ rights; to amend the definition of worker; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 110). Full Employment Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to place a duty on the Chancellor of the Exchequer to pursue a policy of full employment; to make associated provision for an employment guarantee scheme for benefit claimants who have been unemployed and looking for work for longer than six months; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 26 November, and to be printed (Bill 111). Health and Safety at Work Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to amend the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Act 2013 to make provision about civil liability for breaches of health and safety duties, and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 26 November, and to be printed (Bill 112). Asylum Seekers (Accommodation Eviction Procedures) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to make provision for asylum seekers to challenge the proportionality of a proposed eviction from accommodation before an independent court or tribunal; to establish asylum seeker accommodation eviction procedures for public authorities; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 3 December, and to be printed (Bill 113). Disability Benefit Assessments (Recording) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to place a duty on the Secretary of State to ensure that applicants for Disability Benefit are given the option of their eligibility assessment being audio-recorded; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 3 December, and to be printed (Bill 114). Benefit Sanctions (Warnings) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to make provision for warnings to be given to benefit claimants before they are given sanctions; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 115). Universal Credit Sanctions (Zero Hours Contracts) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to amend the Welfare Reform Act 2012 to provide that a Universal Credit claimant may not be sanctioned for refusing work on a zero hours contract; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 December, and to be printed (Bill 116). Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman (Powers) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to grant powers to the Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman to identify and investigate systemic problems in the benefits system and make associated recommendations to the Secretary of State; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 14 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 117). Under-Occupancy Penalty (Report) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to require the Secretary of State to report to Parliament on the merits of repealing those provisions of the Welfare Reform Act 2012 which provide for persons to be paid reduced rates of housing benefit or universal credit because their accommodation is deemed to be under-occupied Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 14 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 118). Social Security Benefits (Healthy Eating) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to require the Secretary of State to publish annual calculations of the benefit and tax credit rates that would be required for a representative household to afford to buy meals in accordance with the Eatwell Guide to eating healthily; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 14 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 119). Housing Standards (Refugees and Asylum Seekers) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to make provision for national minimum standards in accommodation offered to refugees and asylum seekers; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 21 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 120). Asylum Seekers (Permission to Work) (No. 2) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to make provision for granting permission to work to asylum seekers who have waited six months for a decision on their asylum application; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 21 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 121). Evictions (Universal Credit) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Chris Stephens presented a Bill to place a duty on the Secretary of State to prevent the evictions of Universal Credit claimants in rent arrears; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 28 January 2022, and to be printed (Bill 122). Immigration (Health and Social Care Staff) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Christine Jardine presented a Bill to grant indefinite leave to remain to health and social care staff; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 123). Intimate Images (Offences) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mrs Maria Miller presented a Bill to create offences relating to the taking, making and sharing of intimate images without consent; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 3 December, and to be printed (Bill 124). Pregnancy and Maternity (Redundancy Protection) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Mrs Maria Miller, supported by Sally-Ann Hart, Nickie Aiken, Mrs Flick Drummond, Virginia Crosbie, Caroline Nokes, Karen Bradley, Angela Crawley, Sarah Champion, Jeremy Hunt and Stephen Timms, presented a Bill to prohibit redundancy during pregnancy and maternity leave and for six months after the end of the pregnancy or leave, except in specified circumstances; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 3 December, and to be printed (Bill 125). Workers (Rights) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Gavin Newlands, supported by Ian Blackford, Chris Stephens, Mhairi Black, Kirsten Oswald, Brendan O’Hara, David Linden, Drew Hendry, Alan Brown, Alison Thewliss, Amy Callaghan and Owen Thompson, presented a Bill to make provision about workers’ rights; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 22 October, and to be printed (Bill 126). Workers (Rights and Definition) (No. 2) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Angela Crawley presented a Bill to make provision about workers’ rights; to amend the definition of worker; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 3 December, and to be printed (Bill 127). Workers (Rights) (No. 2) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Anum Qaisar-Javed, supported by Ian Blackford, Gavin Newlands, Chris Stephens, Kirsten Oswald, David Linden, Angela Crawley, Martin Docherty-Hughes, Martyn Day, Carol Monaghan, Angus Brendan MacNeil and Owen Thompson, presented a Bill to make provision about workers’ rights; and for connected purposes Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 128). Automated External Defibrillators (Public Access) Bill Presentation and First Reading (Standing Order No. 57) Jim Shannon presented a Bill to require the installation of automated external defibrillators in public buildings, sporting facilities, schools, higher education and other education and skills facilities, and facilities that provide care to vulnerable people; and to make associated provision about training and signage Bill read the First time; to be read a Second time on Friday 10 September, and to be printed (Bill 129).

It is a pleasure to appear before you, Madam Deputy Speaker, and opposite the shadow Deputy Leader of the House, the hon. Member for Lancaster and Fleetwood (Cat Smith), who gave a consummate first performance. The shadow Leader of the House, the hon. Member for Walsall South (Valerie Vaz), called me “suave” in the Chamber last week—the hon. Lady’s impressive skills of discernment are now evident for all to see—and I was rather disappointed at first that she was not in the Chamber today, but I welcome the hon. Member for Lancaster and Fleetwood to her place. She need only follow the example of the shadow Leader of the House to do extremely well. This debate provides an excellent opportunity to cover an unrestricted panorama of subjects without being checked by Mr Speaker for want of relevance. In the spirit of Christmas and in his absence, I want to refer to Mr Speaker and his awesome memory and attention to detail, which do this House proud My hon. Friend the Member for Harrow East (Bob Blackman) spoke about those less fortunate than ourselves. I commend him on the work that he has done and is doing on the Homelessness Reduction Bill, which is making good progress. I am told that it is the longest-ever private Member’s Bill—quite an achievement—and he has clearly done tremendous work in this area. His work with faith groups across our communities is also much appreciated and extremely impressive The hon. Member for North Tyneside (Mary Glindon) spoke about drug deaths being at record levels and the importance of treatment for those who have become addicted to illegal narcotics. She made powerful points, just as she did about fire safety in schools My right hon. Friend the Member for Chipping Barnet (Mrs Villiers) spoke about the digitisation of the tax system and the Federation of Small Businesses’ estimation of the costs. She also spoke of the cost for entrepreneurs. However, it is a voluntary pilot system, and the points that she made with her customary eloquence will be listened to. She is considering the issue with the same skill that she used as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, and she will no doubt keep pursuing her theme. It is a pilot scheme, as I mentioned, so her contributions will be particularly useful in the future The hon. Member for Linlithgow and East Falkirk (Martyn Day) made good points about the dangers of illicit tobacco, about which we all know. Not only is it a danger to the Treasury as it leads to a loss of revenue, but more importantly it is harmful in so many ways. It is harmful to young people, because it may be distributed illicitly, allowing young people to access it, and it may contain unwholesome content that is obviously unregulated My right hon. Friend the Member for Chelmsford (Sir Simon Burns) is a senior Member from whom I have occasionally sought advice. He discussed the problems with the trains in his area—the same infrastructure failures no doubt arise elsewhere—but major investment in the line from Liverpool Street up to his part of the world is under way and there is a commitment for new trains in 2019-20. He made a valid point about the need for jam today as well as jam tomorrow. We would all like jam perhaps every day and, as a member of the “breakfast club” here in the House of Commons, he is someone who partakes of that. His constituents are well served by him, and he made some valid, sensible points about engineering work that sometimes overruns from the weekend into a Monday morning and the fact that freight trains use the line during rush hour. He also mentioned the Government’s planned digital signalling trials. He suggested that his constituency be part of the experiment area. That request will go to the Transport Secretary, because I will make sure that it does, and we will see whether that can be made to apply I was not aware that the hon. Member for Mitcham and Morden (Siobhain McDonagh) had made a music video, but I know now. Obviously, I was in a minority, because I understand that tens of thousands of people have already watched it. She spoke of our businesses and companies in this country, which of course are the engine and lifeblood of the economy. It is appropriate to thank them for the work they do, in employing people and contributing in their highly valuable way to the economy. Full-time work makes up nearly 70% of the growth in employment since 2010. I would like to say that John Lewis is a very good company, as I believe she recognised, and it has an excellent reputation, but I gently encourage all chief executives to find time to meet Members of Parliament when requests for such meetings are made, wherever possible. Her mention of the Ahmadiyya community was appreciated across the House, and I thank her for it. We certainly wish to show our support to the Ahmadiyya community in this country; although small, it is a great asset to our society I see my hon. Friend the Member for Bridgwater and West Somerset (Mr Liddell-Grainger) in his place, and I had to think long and hard about what to say about his speech. He referred to a “merger most foul”, and I am sorry to hear about the local difficulties in his area. I can tell Members who were not present that it was a subtle speech. He is a ferocious voice for his constituents, and those in his district really must think twice before crossing him. I shall say no more about that The hon. Member for City of Chester (Christian Matheson) mentioned that the European Union is a source of concern to him in terms of where we go from here. I assure him that Her Majesty’s Government are not going to be introspective—they are not, will not be and have not been introspective. The UK has always been an outward-looking country and we will continue to be. We should have faith, as he should, in the people of this country moving forward My hon. Friend the Member for Filton and Bradley Stoke (Jack Lopresti) spoke of the MetroBus scheme in his area, which sounds as though it will be a valuable alternative to private car journeys when it is up and running, but there has been consequent congestion and delays. He has clearly been working hard on behalf of his constituents, seeking meetings both here and in his constituency; he particularised the meetings that he has been having on this subject. Progress has apparently been made, so I was pleased to hear about that. I was also struck by what he said about his excellent son and the excellent advice he gave him. He is rightly proud of him and although I have never met his son, may I, too, say that I am proud of him, as someone who has joined Her Majesty’s armed forces recently The hon. Member for West Ham (Lyn Brown) made powerful arguments that had the House paying close attention. The pain of the patients she spoke of undergoing these procedures is palpable. I have already instructed that the matter be raised with the Department of Health, as this issue clearly needs a response, and I will transmit that message to the right quarters. She also mentioned research into arthritis, and I undertake to look into that My hon. and gallant Friend the Member for Beckenham (Bob Stewart) spoke powerfully. May I say to him that I have briefly discussed the matter he raised—the UK soldiers being investigated—on the Front Bench with the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland? First, I wish to say that Her Majesty’s armed forces have made and continue to make such a contribution to peace and stability in Northern Ireland. They will be provided, where necessary, with as much taxpayer-funded legal support as necessary. Her Majesty’s Government are aware of an imbalance in the system and, as part of addressing the legacy of the past, are looking to create a more balanced and proportionate system. I thank my hon. Friend again for his powerful contribution. The way in which he speaks and the subject matter on which he speaks always command the respect and attention of the House The House is richer for the presence of the hon. Member for Strangford (Jim Shannon). He has the true affection of the House. He spoke of his love for Christmas, how he enjoys spending Christmas with his grandchildren and the true meaning of Christmas. His powerful religious invocation struck me and I commend him not only for that but for all his work in this Chamber over the past year and throughout his time as a Member of Parliament. He does a great deal of powerful work on freedom of religion in general throughout the year, as well as for Christians persecuted around the world—sadly, the number of persecuted Christians is ever increasing My hon. Friend the Member for Twickenham (Dr Mathias) spoke of Department for Work and Pensions assessments, and she is a fiercely independent voice throughout the year. I mean that as a compliment, although some Members behind me assume that it was not. She is a fiercely independent voice throughout the year and she continued to show that independence today My hon. Friend the Member for Southend West (Sir David Amess) clearly enjoys these pre-recess Adjournment debates, and we enjoy hearing him. The litany of points that he raised was too long for the short few hours remaining, but I was struck when he mentioned that he lost his mother this year at the age of 104. One is never old enough to lose one’s mother, and my heart goes out to him for his loss. I know that he has mentioned his mother’s birthdays as they have come along each year and I have been pleased to offer my good wishes on those occasions. I commiserate with him for his loss My hon. Friend spoke about the Prince’s Trust, among many other things, and about how effective one division of the trust was in his area. I commend the work of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, who has many achievements and has done superb work in many areas. The Prince’s Trust is one of them. It is the 40th anniversary of the Prince’s Trust this year and it has clearly transformed many young lives, not only in the my hon. Friend’s constituency but across the country. We are very lucky to have the Prince of Wales, in my opinion. I have to get that in, Madam Deputy Speaker, as clearly the House expects it of me My hon. Friend the Member for Cleethorpes (Martin Vickers) spoke affectionately of his constituency. He spoke of the pier of the year winner; I thought for one minute that he was talking about the other place, but he meant the pier that goes out into the sea. On the private sector investment coming the way of Cleethorpes, he spoke of Government support needed in that quarter. He actually requested lots of money for Cleethorpes from Her Majesty’s Government, while reiterating that he was not asking for any money. He certainly made a very attractive case My hon. Friend the Member for Kingston and Surbiton (James Berry), as well as giving a charming retirement message to the chief superintendent of his area, Chief Superintendent Tunstall, whom we all wish well, spoke keenly about social media abuse and the prolific amount of hate speech. The social media companies have a moral responsibility to do more I take this opportunity to commend the cross-party Home Affairs Committee for its report on anti-Semitism. My hon. Friend spoke about that and I know that he is on that Committee. He referred to the 2,500 deeply offensive anti-Semitic messages received in a short period of time by one Member of this House. I commend the Committee for its work. In this context, the death was announced today of Rabbi Lionel Blue. He was a wonderful voice of reason on the airwaves, in marked contrast to the virulent anti-Semitism that we are hearing about on social media in so many quarters My hon. Friend the Member for Kingston and Surbiton spoke about a remark that the late Lady Thatcher had made. The anecdote to which he was referring, if I am correct, was about Lord Young of Graffham, of whom Lady Thatcher had apparently said, “Most people bring me their problems. He brings me solutions.” I have not forgotten the right hon. Member for Leicester East (Keith Vaz), who spoke of the campaign against cyber-bullying and the tragedy of the loss of a boy of 15, Brandon Singh Rayat. The right hon. Gentleman does so much to raise individual cases such as that in this place, and I commend him for that. The whole House offers its sympathy to the parents of Brandon Singh Rayat who, I know, have been in the Palace of Westminster today. We send our deepest commiserations for their loss. The points that the right hon. Gentleman made reiterate the damage done to young people in particular, but to people of all ages, by cyber-bullying The right hon. Member for Leicester East has a tremendous history of good work on diabetes and on Yemen. To my certain knowledge he has focused on Yemen for years—for as long as I have been in the House. Now it is a cause that many are exercised by, rightly, but he has been a beacon of support for Yemen for many years. His support for Leicester football club is also widely known. He said something about mince pies. I will have to consult the Clerk about “Erskine May” on that. We will see whether that applies My hon. Friend the Member for Stafford (Jeremy Lefroy) spoke of his affection for his constituency and the unsung heroes: the small and medium-sized enterprises. It is right that we talk about them, because so much work is put in by small business owners and managers, who often work all hours of the day and night and are the lifeblood of our economy. My hon. Friend made very valuable points about the ivory trade as well. His knowledge of African affairs is very impressive. I remember speaking to him a few weeks ago and I was bowled over by his knowledge of African affairs. When he speaks on the subject, he speaks with experience and persuasion My hon. Friend the Member for Dudley South (Mike Wood) spoke of the valuable work done by volunteers and what we can do to encourage companies to encourage volunteers to do good work. I know of one example from my own constituency: the Nationwide building society, which I think allows each of its employees three days a year to do voluntary work in their communities. They are paid by the company for those three days, as part of the company’s social action project. If more companies can do that sort of thing, it will provide encouragement for those who wish to support their community. My hon. Friend said that he had visited every school in his constituency. Someone asked from a sedentary position whether he had passed all the exams. I have no doubt that he would if he needed to My hon. Friend the Member for Congleton (Fiona Bruce) spoke powerfully about school funding. I know that she will continue to fight on that subject. She is a powerful voice for her constituency, and she certainly knows how to make it heard in this place I take this opportunity to wish everyone a happy Christmas, particularly the staff of the House, the staff of Members of Parliament, the police and security staff who look after us, Mr Speaker and all the Deputy Speakers, including you, Madam Deputy Speaker. We have had a year to remember: 2016 will go down in history for myriad reasons, not least this country’s second female Prime Minister, along with many other causes of celebration But the House also lost a Member in the prime of her life. Jo Cox was an exemplar of public service. If I may say so, her family have shown extraordinary dignity in their bearing. We remember that family at Christmas. We wish them and all our constituents, especially those who have suffered a bereavement, all the very best this Christmas and in the new year Question put and agreed to. Resolved, That this House has considered matters to be raised before the forthcoming adjournment.

