Relevant speeches for theme war_GB and topic 6

I pay tribute to the excellent speakers we have heard so far, particularly my hon. Friend the Member for Lewisham, Deptford (Vicky Foxcroft), who is no longer in her place. From the point of view of the lives of two young people, she explained the difference that adequate resources across swathes of the public sector makes to the life chances of children, as well as the cost to the public purse. I could not put it any better, and her speech will remain in my memory for a long time to come In my constituency in the past year, we have seen an increase in muggings at knifepoint. In March in Isleworth, a 17-year-old man was knifed and tragically died. It seems to be the case that most of the victims and perpetrators were teenagers, starting out on life. The perpetrators were known to some of the victims; they were part of a tit-for-tat feud, perhaps drugs-related. Other incidents were random attacks on young people for their phones or bank cards. Hounslow, my borough, has one of the lowest levels of violent crime incidents in London, but that does not really feel good to my constituents because violent crime has increased overall everywhere, including in Hounslow. At least the Home Secretary has admitted that fact The police have clearly been the focus of debates on violent crime and knife crime, which is where I am focusing my speech, but we cannot just talk about the police in terms of responses to persistent crime and crime incidents, particularly in certain areas. Those responses work well where the police work with other agencies. For instance, following a spate of muggings on Chiswick back common, the public worked with police, the council, local businesses, youth workers and so on to find solutions, and it really worked. Between a public meeting held in December in response to the attacks and the follow-up meeting in March, the number of incidents had gone down to zero. However, the problem is that the police in London are working with one hand behind their back. Extra patrols in one hotspot are viable only until another hotspot is identified elsewhere and the police have to be moved on to work there. My hon. Friend the Member for Lewisham, Deptford described the cost to the public purse and police time of every serious injury and murder from violent crime. She asked: could not that time—that resource—be better spent? Of course it could We are starting from the baseline of serious police cuts—3,000 fewer police officers in London, or more than 80 fewer in the Borough of Hounslow. We have seen a similar cut in the number of local police community support officers, so that the ward teams are less than half their strength in 2010. That is all as a direct result of the one-third cut in Government grant to the London Mayor’s budget. By 2022, the Metropolitan police will have lost about £1 billion in funding since 2010. The London Mayor, Sadiq Khan, is doing what he can and he is contributing to frontline policing, but the scale of the cuts causes delays in responding to crime, less outreach and less community policing, where officers get to know the youngsters on their patch I am really pleased that the Mayor of London has adopted the public health model. He has learned from the experience in Glasgow, which has been mentioned. He has put some money back into the Metropolitan police budget—£234 million—which has brought back some extra police officers, but nothing like as many as we have lost. Even if the police were funded at the same level as in 2010, we all know that credible action by the police working in conjunction with others is not the solution. It may simply move the problem. Perhaps the police are successful and lock up serious offenders, which puts them out of action for a while, but actually, by the time the police are involved with a young person, whether the victim or an alleged perpetrator, it is too late. The police are dealing with the symptoms of the problems, not what has gone wrong To understand the impact of cuts in my constituency, as a result of the trigger-point incidents I have met local police, headteachers, school and college students, councillors and many others. I wanted to know what my constituents felt about the rising incidence of knife crime, so in April I hosted a crime summit in Isleworth—it was already being planned before the tragic murder. I am also currently distributing a crime survey to ask local people about their experience of serious youth crime, as well as their views on the causes and solutions and on support for young people and their parents. I have already received a lot of replies. People want action. They see the impact of crime on their community and on their children. They want to make a difference, but they want the Government to take action and to commit real funding to the places where it is needed In one response to one of the questions, “What do you think is the cause of the problem?” was written the word “criminals”, but we all know that we cannot put people into pigeonholes and define one group of young people as criminals and everybody else as the public. I think everybody in this debate and all the other respondents to my survey understand that. In the survey, the issue of police numbers was frequently raised. People know that the police are under-resourced and they see the pressure it that is putting on services such as crime reporting, police-community engagement and so on The most common issue raised in the survey was the lack of and cuts to youth services. People see youth services as part of a range of solutions. They are not just something for children to do after school while they wait for their parents to come home. They are a place for children to socialise, meet responsible role models, learn a skill or a sport and touch base with somebody who can help them with their problems. They are a place for counselling services, homework clubs and so on. Those things need a base, which has to be open at the times and on days when children need them. I was very upset to hear a Government Member talk about youth clubs not being nine-to-five. Good quality, well funded youth clubs do not just open after school during the week; they are open at weekends and during the holidays As I said, my constituents do not label those caught up in crime as someone else’s fault or as someone else’s child. That became clear when several mothers raised with me their worries about their own youngsters, asking themselves, “Is my child at risk of getting caught up? Are they carrying a knife, whether for protection or planned use?” The reality is that it makes little difference if a children is maimed or killed. One other worrying thing we are finding is anecdotal evidence that, faced with stop-and-search, girls are carrying knives for the boys. Parents want a safe space to share their concerns about their children Young people told me that in almost all cases the youngsters they knew—they may or may not have been speaking for themselves—who were at risk or were involved in gang activities, carrying knives and so on, were doing so reluctantly. It was not their voluntary choice. They were often caught up in something. One example involved a young person who had no food at home because there was no money to buy food. Hanging around after school or college outside a chicken shop, somebody said, “You a bit hungry, mate? I’ll buy you a meal.” “Oh, okay, fine.” That young person was then caught up: “When are you going to pay me back?” That is just one simple example of how easy it is for young people who do not have any money, who have time on their hands or are looking for role models, to get caught up in gang and non-consensual activity. That just illustrates why we need better quality early intervention Every headteacher and school manager I have spoken to over the past three years, often about school cuts, has told me that the impact of the real-terms cuts on their schools, including primary schools, has meant that too often they have had to cut services such as welfare, counselling, mental health support, affordable after-school activities and so on—all the things that they know keep children positively occupied. We all remember what a teacher said the other day on “Question Time” on the BBC when she challenged the Minister. She said that teachers know who these young people are, so they would prefer that, rather than giving them more work to do, the Home Secretary supported them in the work they are trying to do with the children who are vulnerable. The silo nature of Government does not help. It is good that the Home Office team and their Opposition shadows are leading the debate, but where are the Ministers from the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government, the Department for Education or the Department of Health and Social Care? It is not just the responsibility of the Home Secretary and the Home Office Funding is at the centre of this issue across the country, whether in cities or towns, urban or rural areas, for local authorities, police services, charities or other services. My right hon. Friend the Member for Normanton, Pontefract and Castleford (Yvette Cooper), the Chair of the Home Affairs Committee, said that the Home Office is providing new funds of around £35 million annually, but that should be set against the £768 million cut per annum on youth services across the country. The figures for all of the Home Secretary’s wonderful new projects come to only 5% of the cuts made to youth services. Local authorities used to receive a substantial amount of their total income from MHCLG, yet those grants have been cut by more than 50%, and more in areas of greater deprivation As has been said in numerous debates in this place, cuts to local government have meant cuts to all services, particularly non-statutory services, of which youth services are among the most prominent. Let us have no illusions about these politically driven austerity policies. Austerity is not about economic necessity; it is about cutting the public sector. When the public sector is cut, there are cuts to youth services, police services, education and so on Early interventions, such as children’s centres, basic welfare and early counselling, benefit most the young people who are at the greatest risk of being victims or perpetrators of crime. We need to see them restored. We need more school nurses and specialist mental health services in schools, as well as local counselling services. Cuts to leisure services mean that pools and sports centres may stay open, but only if the price rises beyond the pocket of young people from low-income families, so again they are excluded Too many communities are having to deal with the heartbreaking impact of violent crime, and the Government are still being too slow to act. I appreciate that the Home Secretary acknowledges the seriousness of the issue, but Ministers cannot just offer warm words. One-off funding announcements are a drop in the ocean compared with the funding lost to youth services, schools, colleges, the police and so on. That is the real issue that needs addressing. We need sustained investment in our communities in early intervention, youth clubs and frontline policing. The warm words of Conservative Members are meaningless when their austerity is the root of the problem.

I beg to move, That the Bill be now read a Second time It is a great pleasure to open this Second Reading debate, albeit with a sense of déjà vu. Those of us who had the privilege of being in the House on 2 October last year will not have failed to be moved by the many powerful contributions we heard, including from the hon. Member for Canterbury (Rosie Duffield), who recounted her own very personal and heart-wrenching experience of domestic abuse. She was not alone in showing great courage by bringing home to this House the devastating impact of domestic abuse on the lives of survivors, as this Bill has also brought forth very personal accounts from, among others, the hon. Members for Bradford West (Naz Shah) and for Swansea East (Carolyn Harris). On that occasion, I was able to share my own personal experiences, as a young barrister, of domestic abuse. I will not repeat them today, because I have no doubt that we will hear some memorable speeches in this debate—more testimony, adding power to what has already been said After the last debate, some Members approached me privately to share with me their own domestic abuse experiences—stories that are still raw and still cannot be told. For many of us, the sounds and sights witnessed in our homes, often as children, still haunt us many years on. The experiences we have heard recounted by Members are, sadly, all too frequently repeated across the country. I have heard no more harrowing account recently than that of Claire Throssell, whom I had the privilege to meet last October. Claire’s young sons, Jack and Paul, were killed at the hands of her abusive partner. No one can imagine the pain and suffering that she has had to endure, but we owe her a debt of gratitude for giving such a powerful voice to the survivors of domestic abuse Gratitude is also due to Tracy Graham, a victim of controlling and violent domestic abuse who this year chose to speak out, go public and share her experiences with my local community in Swindon via the new Swindon domestic abuse support service, which I helped to launch just before lockdown, seven weeks ago. Tracy is not only a domestic abuse ambassador for the service, but is volunteering with the local police as well, to help to support domestic abuse victims who are going through what she went through. She truly is an inspirational young woman—one of many who are standing up, stepping forward and sharing their harrowing experiences, to the benefit of current and future survivors and victims It is right, in this time of covid-19, to dwell a little on the impact that this pandemic is having on victims of domestic abuse and their families. We are seeing evidence of it in the increased calls to domestic abuse helplines. My local refuge had an increase in referrals of 80% in one week, and the helpline in my local area had an increase in the number of calls of nearly 30%. People are speaking up and speaking out about domestic abuse, but it is happening even at this time of great crisis The phrase “Stay at home”, which we so associate with the directions to deal with covid-19, should be words of reassurance and comfort. The home should be a place of safety, both physical and mental. The concept of the home as a refuge is such a strong one, yet for too many people it is not a refuge. At this time of lockdown, that fear, distress and suffering is multiplied. I assure all victims that help is available. The police continue to respond to incidents of domestic abuse, and anyone in immediate danger should not hesitate to call 999 and the emergency services. Where necessary, the existing civil order framework can be used to remove a perpetrator from the family home in order to protect victims of abuse We are working with and listening carefully to domestic abuse and victims organisations to make sure that we understand what their most pressing needs and priorities are, and we are committed to ensuring that victims have a comprehensive package of support available. We have launched a new campaign to signpost victims to the support services available and provided an additional £2.6 million to ensure that the national helplines have the capacity to respond to increased demand In addition, we are working with the domestic abuse commissioner to ensure that refuges and other organisations that provide frontline support to victims will be able to access the £750 million fund set aside by my right hon. Friend the Chancellor to bolster charities that are responding directly to the pandemic. I am happy to say to the House that allocations under the charities package will be made very shortly indeed. The Home Secretary and I have together been very much engaged in tailoring the requests to ensure that help is targeted where it will make the most difference. Having spoken to police and crime commissioners, I know that many are making available extra resources for safe accommodation I am grateful to the Home Affairs Committee for the report that it published yesterday on the pandemic’s impact on victims of domestic abuse. I welcome the Committee’s support for our public information campaign and the additional funding. We will of course respond promptly to the Committee’s recommendations In short, this is a concerted period of direct action being taken by the Government. Measures are being taken to address directly the concerns that I know the shadow Home Secretary, the hon. Member for Torfaen (Nick Thomas-Symonds), whom I welcome to his post, will raise in due course. Let me turn to the Bill, which is necessarily about strengthening protection and support for victims in the longer term. I share the frustration of Members from all parties that we are having to repeat a number of stages of this Bill, which was initially championed by my right hon. Friend the Member for Maidenhead (Mrs May). All parties want to see this Bill on the statute book, but we have to put to good use the time available to us since the election to make it an even stronger Bill than the one that came before the House last October The aims of the Bill are fourfold: first, to raise awareness of this insidious crime; secondly, to better protect and support victims and their children; thirdly, to transform the response to the criminal, civil and family justice systems; and, fourthly, to improve performance across all national and local agencies. I shall take those objectives in turn If we are to tackle domestic abuse effectively, it is vital that the nature of that abuse is properly understood and recognised. Part 1 of the Bill sets out a statutory definition of domestic abuse. It will apply for the purposes of the whole Bill, but we also expect it to be adopted across all agencies that have a shared responsibility for combating this crime and for helping survivors to rebuild their lives. The definition makes it clear that domestic abuse is not confined to violent or sexual abuse, but includes controlling or coercive behaviour, psychological abuse and economic abuse, too. Identifying and calling out domestic abuse in all its manifestations is just a first step. We then need to protect and support victims. In terms of protection, a number of civil orders are already available to help to safeguard survivors, but the existing landscape of occupation orders, non-molestation orders and domestic violence protection orders is complex, and none are, arguably, wholly adequate to the task The new domestic abuse protection order—DAPO—will bring together the best elements of the existing civil order regimes. It will be available in the civil, criminal and family courts. It will be flexible, in that the court will determine the length of an order and decide what prohibitions, and positive requirements too, are appropriate to attach to it, including conditions that may compel the respondent to attend perpetrator programmes or require them to wear an electronic tag. The new DAPO will also have teeth, with a breach of conditions being a criminal offence punishable by up to five years’ imprisonment or a fine, or both We want to get these new orders right so that they work for victims and their children, the police, the courts and others who will have to operate them. We will therefore be piloting these new orders in a small number of areas before rolling them out nationally But protecting victims from abuse is never enough on its own. We also need to ensure that they are effectively supported as they reset their lives. The Bill, as reintroduced, includes a significant new measure to that end. When a victim of abuse has to flee their home and seek sanctuary in a refuge or other safe accommodation, it is not enough simply to provide that person with a safe place to sleep. In such circumstances, victims and their children need access to counselling and mental health support, advice about follow-on housing, help in enrolling children in a new school, or specialist support, such as translation services or access to immigration advice. We know that refuges and other providers of safe accommodation struggle to provide such support so, to plug that gap, the Bill will place new duties on tier 1 local authorities in England. Under part 4 of the Bill, such local authorities will be required to assess the need for accommodation-based support for all victims of domestic abuse and their children in the area. Having identified that need, the relevant local authorities will then be required to develop, publish and give effect to a strategy for the provision of such support in their locality Of course, these new duties will come at a cost—some £90 million a year, we estimate. I assure the House that my right hon. Friend the Housing Secretary is committed to ensuring that local authorities are appropriately resourced as part of the spending review I know from my own experience of the legal system that appearing as a witness in criminal, civil or family proceedings can be—shall we say—a daunting experience, so we need to make sure that the victims of domestic abuse can give their best evidence in court. In the criminal courts, that often means being able to give evidence hidden from view of the alleged perpetrator or via a video link. The Bill provides that these and other so-called special measures will be automatically available to victims. In the family courts, for a long time, there have been calls for a bar on the practice of perpetrators being able to cross-examine in person the victims of domestic abuse. Such an experience is bound to be traumatising for victims—it must stop. We have listened to the views of the Joint Committee that examined the draft Bill. Indeed, the Bill as reintroduced now extends the circumstances in which the automatic prohibition on cross-examination in person applies, which is a welcome further step to safeguard and prevent the perpetuation of abuse through the courts I know that there are wider concerns about the experiences of victims of domestic abuse in the family courts, which was why we established last year a specialist panel to examine how effectively the family courts respond to allegations of domestic abuse and other harms in private law proceedings, including around the provision of special measures. I aim to publish very shortly the panel’s recommendations, together with the Government’s response. One way we can improve the experiences of victims is by better integrating domestic abuse-related proceedings right across the various jurisdictions in our courts With that in mind, we committed in our manifesto to pilot integrated family and crime domestic abuse courts. My right hon. Friend the Chancellor set aside £5 million in his March Budget to allow that important pilot to progress. Again, I expect to be able to inform the House soon as to how the trial of these new integrated domestic abuse courts will be taken forward. I will take a close personal interest, to make sure that there is a genuine bringing together of the jurisdictions around the victim, around the family—around those people who need the support and benefit of any orders and sanctions that the court might impose It is not only the courts where there is room for improvement. The new independent domestic abuse commissioner will help drive consistency and better performance in the response to domestic abuse right across the relevant local and national agencies. The relevant agencies will be under a statutory duty to co-operate with the commissioner, and will be required to respond within 56 days to any recommendations that the commissioner makes. We are lucky to have Nicole Jacobs, who brings a wealth of experience to the role, and I fully expect her to perform her functions without fear or favour I know that, on the previous Second Reading, a number of hon. Members argued for the post to be full time. We reviewed—with Nicole Jacobs—the appropriate time commitment for this role and have now extended it from three to four days per week. The Minister for safeguarding, my hon. Friend the Member for Louth and Horncastle (Victoria Atkins), will keep this matter under review as we transition to the statutory arrangements provided for in part 2 of the Bill We did not want to wait until the Bill became law to make that appointment, and I am very glad we did not, because Nicole Jacobs is already making a huge difference. One area where we want to draw on her experience is in the provision of community-based support. As I described, the provisions in part 4 of the Bill will make sure that victims of domestic abuse in safe accommodation receive the support they need, but of course most victims of abuse remain in their own home, and they need to be able to access appropriate support while doing so Victim support services are provided in the community by police and crime commissioners, local authorities and other agencies, but the landscape is, frankly, complex, and there are undoubtedly gaps in the current provision. In order to determine what action needs to be taken, we must better understand the existing routes by which these services are commissioned and funded. To that end, the domestic abuse commissioner has agreed to undertake an in-depth exploration of the current community-based landscape of support. Once we have her findings and recommendations, we will work with her to understand the needs identified and to develop the right options for how best to address them Finally, I will say a few words about the amendments put forward in the last Session by my hon. Friend the Member for Wyre Forest (Mark Garnier) and the right hon. and learned Member for Camberwell and Peckham (Ms Harman). It is absolutely right that we reinforce current case law that a person cannot consent to violence that leads to serious injury or death. To be clear, there is no such thing as the rough sex defence. I had a productive meeting with both Members to discuss the issue, and, as I made clear to them, we are looking at how best to address it. It is a complex area of criminal law, and we need to ensure that any statutory provisions have the desired effect and do not have any unintended consequences; we do not want to inadvertently create loopholes or uncertainties in the law that can then be exploited by those who perpetrate crimes. I am confident that we will be able to set out our approach in time for Report, and I am grateful for the continuing constructive engagement on this important and sensitive issue Domestic abuse is one of the most prevalent crimes in our society—let us be honest and frank about that. It is staggering that some 2.4 million people experience domestic abuse each year, and unforgivable that, on average, more than two individuals, the majority of whom are women, are killed each and every week in a domestic homicide Tackling domestic abuse needs to be everyone’s business, from prevention to protection to prosecution to support. Legislation alone can never have all the answers, but I believe that this landmark Bill will make a significant contribution and I commend it to the House.

With this it will be convenient to discuss the following: Government new clause 54—Powers to seize invalid travel documents. Government new clause 55—Anonymity of victims of forced marriage. Government new clause 56—Licensing functions under taxi and PHV legislation: protection of children and vulnerable adults. Government new clause 57—Powers of litter authorities in Scotland. New clause 3—Digital Crime Review— “(1) The Secretary of State shall have a duty to provide for a review of legislation which contains powers to prosecute individuals who may have been involved in the commission of digital crime in order to consolidate such powers in a single statute (2) In the conduct of the review under subsection (1), the Secretary of State must have regard to the statutes and measures that he deems appropriate, including but not limited to— (a) Malicious Communications Act 1988, section 1, (b) Protection from Harassment Act 1997, section 2, 2a, 4, 4a, (c) Offences against the Person Act 1861, section 16, 20, 39, 47, (d) Data Protection Act 1998, section 10, 13 and 55, (e) Criminal Justice Act 1998, section 160, (f) Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000, section 30(1), (3),(5),(6), 78(5), (g) Computer Misuse Act 1990, as amended by Serious Crime Act 2015 and Police and Justice Act 2006, (h) Contempt of Court Act 1981, (i) Human Rights Act 1998, (j) Public Order Act 1986, section 4, 4a, 5, 16(b), 18, (k) Serious Organised Crime Act 2005, section 145, 46, (l) Wireless Telegraphy Act 2006, section 48, (m) Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2014, section 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, (n) Protection of Children Act 1978, (o) Obscene Publications Act 1959, (p) Crime and Disorder Act 1998, section 28, 29-32, (q) Criminal Justice Act 2003, section 145, 146, (r) Communications Act 2003, section 127, 128-131, (s) Data retention and Investigatory Powers Act 2014, section 4, (t) Sexual Offences Amendment Act 1992, section 5, (u) Counter Terrorism and Security Act 2015, (v) Protection of Freedoms Act 2012, section 33(5), 29(6), (w) Criminal Damage Act 1971, section 2, (x) Sexual Offences Act 2003, section 4, 8, 10, 62, (y) Criminal Justice and Police Act 2001, section 43, (z) Magistrates Court Act 1980, section 127, () Suicide Act 1961, section 2(1) as amended by Coroners and Justice Act 2009, () Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008, section 63, () Theft Act 1968, section 21, and () Criminal Law Act 1977, section 51(2) (3) It shall be a duty of the Secretary of State to determine for the review any other statute under which persons have been prosecuted for a crime falling under section 1 of this Act (4) In the conduct of the review under subsection (1), the Secretary of State must consult with any person or body he deems appropriate, including but not limited to— (a) the Police, (b) Crown Prosecution Service, (c) judiciary, and (d) relevant community organisations.” New clause 4—Surveillance and monitoring: offences— “(1) A person commits an offence if the person— (a) uses a digital device to repeatedly locate, listen to or watch a person without legitimate purpose, (b) installs spyware, a webcam or any other device or software on another person’s property or digital device without the user’s agreement or without legitimate reason, (c) takes multiple images of an individual unless it is in the public interest to do so without that individual’s permission and where the intent was not legitimate nor lawful, (d) repeatedly orders goods or services for another person if the purpose of such actions is to cause distress, anxiety or to disrupt that person’s daily life, (e) erases data remotely whilst a digital device is being examined by the police or any other lawful investigation, (f) monitors a digital device registered to a person aged 17 or less if the purpose of that monitoring is to obtain information about a third person, (g) monitors any other person’s digital device if the intent of the monitor is either to damage or steal data from that person, or (h) creates a false persona on line without lawful reason if the purpose of such a creation is to intend to attempt to defraud, groom, impersonate or seriously damage the reputation of any other person. (2) A person guilty of an offence under subsections (1)(a) or (b) is liable on conviction to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 12 months or a fine (3) For the purpose of subsection (1)(a) “repeatedly” shall be deemed as on two occasions or more (4) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1)(d) is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding the statutory limit (5) A person guilty of an offence under subsections (1)(e), (f), (g) or (h) is liable on conviction to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 12 months (6) The Secretary of State shall introduce restrictions on the sale of spyware to persons under the age of 16 and requests all persons who are purchasing such equipment to state their intended use of such equipment.” New clause 5—Digital crime training and education— ‘(1) It shall be the responsibility of the Home Department to ensure that each Police Service shall invest in training on the prioritisation, investigation and evidence gathering in respect of digital crime and abuse (2) It shall be the responsibility of the Home Department to ensure that all Police services record complaints and outcomes of complaints of digital crime and abuse (3) It shall be the responsibility of the Secretary of State for the Home Department to publish annual statistics on complaints and outcomes of digital crime and abuse.” New clause 6—Offence of abduction of a vulnerable child aged 16 or 17— “(1) A person shall be guilty of an offence if, knowingly and without lawful authority or reasonable excuse, he or she— (a) takes a child to whom this section applies away from the responsible person; or (b) keeps such a child away from the responsible person; or (c) induces, assists or incites such a child to run away or stay away from the responsible person or from a child’s place of residence (2) This section applies in relation to a child aged 16 or 17 who is— (a) a child in need as defined in section 17 of the Children Act 1989; or (b) a child looked after under section 20 of the Children Act 1989; or (c) a child housed alone under part 7 of the Housing Act 1996; or (d) a child who is suffering or is likely to suffer significant harm subject to section 47 1(b) of the Children Act 1989 (3) In this section “the responsible person” is— (a) a person with a parental responsibility as defined in the Children Act 1989; or (b) a person who for the time being has care of a vulnerable child aged 16 and 17 by virtue of a care order, an emergency protection order, or protection from section 46 of the Children Act 1989; or (c) any other person as defined in regulations for the purposes of this section (4) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be liable— (a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum or to both such imprisonment and fine; or (b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years (5) No prosecution for an offence above shall be instituted except by or with the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions.” New clause 10—Prevention of child sexual exploitation and private hire vehicles— “(1) The Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1976 is amended as follows (2) After section 47(1) insert— “(1A) A district council must carry out its functions under this section with a view to preventing child sexual exploitation” (3) At end of section 48 (1) insert— “(c) a district council must carry out its functions under this section with a view to preventing child sexual exploitation” (4) Section 7 of the London Cab Order 1934 is amended as follows (5) After section 7(2) insert— “(2A) Transport for London must carry out its functions under this section with a view to preventing child sexual exploitation.”” (6) Section 7 of the Private Hire Vehicles (London) Act 1998 is amended as follows (7) After section 7(2) insert— “(3) The licensing authority must carry out its functions under this section with a view to preventing child sexual exploitation.”” This new clause would place local authorities under a duty to consider how they can prevent child sexual exploitation when they issue licences for taxis and private hire vehicles. New clause 13—Grooming for criminal behaviour: offence— “(1) A person aged 18 or over (A) commits an offence if— (a) A has met or communicated with another person (B) on at least two occasions and subsequently— (i) A intentionally meets B, (ii) A travels with the intention of meeting B in any part of the world or arranges to meet B in any part of the world, or (iii) B travels with the intention of meeting A in any part of the world, (b) A intends to say or do anything to or in respect of B, during or after the meeting mentioned in paragraph (a)(i) to (iii) and in any part of the world, which if done will— (i) encourage, (ii) persuade, or (iii) intimidate B with the effect that B commits a criminal offence from which A will, or intends to, profit (c) B is under 16, and (d) A does not reasonably believe that B is 16 or over (2) For subsection (1)(b)(iii) to apply, A does not have to profit directly nor be the sole beneficiary of a criminal offence committed by B (3) In subsection (1) the reference to A having met or communicated with B is a reference to A having met B in any part of the world or having communicated with B by any means from, to or in any part of the world (4) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable— (a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum or both, (b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years.” New clause 14—Grooming for criminal behaviour: prevention orders— “(1) A court may make an order under this section in respect of a person aged 18 or over (A) where— (a) A has committed an offence under section (Grooming for criminal behaviour); or (b) the court is satisfied that A’s behaviour makes it necessary to make such an order, for the purpose of protecting one or more persons aged 16 or under from being encouraged, persuaded or intimidated by A into committing a crime from which A intends to profit (2) A chief officer of police may by complaint to a magistrates’ court apply for an order under this section in respect of a person who resides in his police area or who the chief officer believes is in, or is intending to come to, his police area if it appears to the chief officer that— (a) the person has committed an offence under section (Grooming for criminal behaviour); or (b) the person’s behaviour makes it reasonable to make such an order, for the purpose of protecting one or more other persons aged 16 or under from being encouraged, persuaded, facilitated or intimidated into committing a crime from which others will, or intend to, profit (c) the person has acted in such a way as to give reasonable cause to believe that it is necessary for such an order to be made (3) An application under subsection (2) may be made to any magistrates’ court whose commission area includes— (a) any part of the applicant’s police area, or (b) any place where it is alleged that the person acted in a way mentioned in subsection (2)(b) (4) A grooming for criminal behaviour prevention order (GCBPO) that includes one or more requirements must specify the person who is to be responsible for supervising compliance with the requirement who may be an individual or an organisation (5) Before including a requirement, the court must receive evidence about its suitability and enforceability from— (a) the individual to be specified under subsection (1), if an individual is to be specified; (b) an individual representing the organisation to be specified under subsection (1), if an organisation is to be specified (6) Before including two or more requirements, the court must consider their compatibility with each other (7) It is the duty of a person specified under subsection (4)— (a) to make any necessary arrangements in connection with the requirements for which the person has responsibility (the “relevant requirements”); (b) to promote the compliance of the GCBPO subject with the relevant requirements; (c) if the person considers that the GCBPO subject— (i) has complied with all the relevant requirements, or (ii) has failed to comply with a relevant requirement, to inform the prosecution and the appropriate chief officer of police (8) In subsection (7)(c) “the appropriate chief officer of police” means— (a) the chief officer of police for the police area in which it appears to the person specified under subsection (1) that— (i) the GCBRO subject lives, or (ii) one or more persons aged 16 or under as mentioned in subsection (1)(b) lives; (b) if it appears to a person specified under subsection (4) that the GCBPO subject lives in more than one police area, whichever of the relevant chief officers of police that person thinks it most appropriate to inform (9) The subject of a GCBPO, in addition to any specific restrictions and requirements detailed within the order, must— (a) keep in touch with the person specified under subsection (4) in relation to that requirement, in accordance with any instructions given by that person from time to time; and (b) notify the person of any change of address These obligations have effect as requirements of the order.” New clause 15—Sentencing guidelines review: children— “(1) With an year of the day on which this Act is passed the Sentencing Council must conduct a review of it sentencing guidelines as they relate to crime against children and crimes where the victim is a child (2) The Sentencing Council must publish the findings of its review and lay a copy of that report before Parliament (3) In conducting this review the Sentencing Council must consult— (a) the Secretary of State for Justice, (b) and any other bodies it thinks relevant (4) For the purpose of this section “child” has the same meaning as in section 105 of the Children Act 1989.” This new clause would require the Sentencing Council to review the sentencing guideline for offences committed against children. New clause 16—Soliciting via telecommunications order: applications, grounds and effect— “(1) A chief officer of police may by complaint to a magistrates’ court apply for an order under this section (a “soliciting via telecommunication order“) in respect of a telecommunications service provider if it appears to the chief officer that a phone number (“the relevant phone number”) administered by a telecommunications service provider is being used for the purposes of advertising a person’s services as a prostitute (2) The chief office of police may make an application under subsection (1) only if the relevant phone number has been advertised in the chief officer‘s police area (3) Such an order requires the telecommunications service provider to take all reasonable steps to prevent calls to the relevant phone number being connected (4) It shall be an offence for a telecommunication service provider to fail to comply with terms of an order issued under this section (5) An organisation found guilty of an offence under subsection (5) shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine no greater than £50,000.” This new clause would enable the police to request that a magistrate issues an order to mobile phone providers that they block a number if that number is on cards advertising prostitution and create an offence if they fail to comply with a fine of up to £50,000. New clause 18—Cruelty to persons under sixteen: penalty— “(1) The Children and Young Persons Act 1933 is amended as follows (2) In section 1(1)(a) leave out the words “ten” and insert “fourteen.”” To increase the maximum tariff for child cruelty from 10 years imprisonment to 14 years. New clause 33—Police observance of the Victims’ Code: enforcement— “(1) The Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1967 is amended as follows (2) In section 5(1B) omit paragraph (a) together with the final “or” (3) After section 5(1B) insert— “(1BA) Subsection (1C) of this section applies if a written complaint is made to the Commissioner by a member of the public who claims that— (a) a police officer (b) a police service employee other than a police officer (c) another person determined under section (1BC) has failed to perform a Code duty owed by him to the member of the public (1BB) For the purposes of subsection (1BA) a Code duty is a duty imposed by a code of practice issued under section 32 of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 (code of practice for victims) (1BC) The Secretary of State may by regulation amend the categories of person identified in subsection (1BA) as the Secretary of State thinks fit.” (4) In section 5(4A), after “(1A)”, insert “or (1BA)” (5) In section 6(3), at the beginning insert “Except as provided in subsection (3A)” (6) After section 6(3), insert— “(3A) Subsection (3) shall apply in relation to a complaint under section 5(1BA) as if for “a member of the House of Commons” there were substituted “the Commissioner”.” (7) In section 7(1A), after “5(1A)”, insert “or 5(1BA)” (8) In section 8(1A), after “5(1A)”, insert “or 5(1BA)” (9) After section 10(2A), insert— “(2B) In any case where the Commissioner conducts an investigation pursuant to a complaint under section 5(1BA) of this Act, he shall send a report of the results of the investigation to— (a) the person to whom the complaint relates, (b) the principal officer of the department or authority concerned and to any other person who is alleged in the relevant complaint to have taken or authorised the action complained of, and (c) the Commissioner for Victims and Witnesses appointed under section 48 of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004.” (10) After section 10(3B) insert— “(3C) If, after conducting an investigation pursuant to a complaint under section 5(1BA) of this Act, it appears to the Commissioner that— (a) the person to whom the complaint relates has failed to perform a Code duty owed by him to the person aggrieved, and (b) the failure has not been, or will not be, remedied, the Commissioner shall lay before each House of Parliament a special report upon the case (3D) If the Commissioner lays a special report before each House of Parliament pursuant to subsection (3C) the Commissioner may also send a copy of the report to any person as the Commissioner thinks appropriate (3E) For the purposes of subsection (3C) “Code duty” has the meaning given by section 5(1BB) of this Act.” (11) In section 10(5)(d), for “or (2A)” substitute “, (2A) or (2B)” (12) In section 12(1), after paragraph (b) of the definition of “person aggrieved”, insert— “(c) in relation to a complaint under section 5(1BA) of this Act, means the person to whom the duty referred to in section 5 (1BA) of this Act is or is alleged to be owed;”.” New clause 34—Police, etc. provision for victims’ entitlement: framework— “(1) The Victims’ Code (a code of practice issued under section 32 of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 (code of practice for victims)) shall include, but not be limited to, the entitlement of victims to receive as follows (2) A victim of crime shall be entitled to receive— (a) accurate and timely information from— (i) the police (ii) such other agencies of the criminal justice system concerned with the detection and prosecution of the relevant crime and with the support of victims of crime as the Secretary of State deems fit; (b) The police must ensure provision to victims of adequate notice of all relevant court and other legal proceedings, including information about decisions by and discussions between the police and other agencies of the criminal justice system relating to the person convicted of the crime concerned (“the perpetrator”), including— (i) information about any prison sentence previously served by the perpetrator, (ii) information about relevant changes to the perpetrator’s circumstances whilst on parole or in custody, (iii) information about any crimes committed by the perpetrator outside the UK where the victim of the crime concerned is a British national, (iv) access, where required, to adequate interpretation and translation services, and (v) information about the direct contact details of the criminal justice agencies and individuals involved in the court or other legal proceedings concerned (3) During criminal justice proceedings, the police and other relevant agencies and authorities of the criminal justice system must ensure that victims of crime— (a) are not subjected to unnecessary delay by any other party to the proceedings; (b) are treated with dignity and respect by all parties involved; and (c) do not experience discriminatory behaviour from any other party to the proceedings (4) Children and vulnerable adults must be able to give evidence to a court secure location away from that court or from behind a protective screen (5) The investigating police force concerned must ensure the safety and protection of victims of crime during proceedings, including but not restricted to— (a) a presumption that victims of crime may remain domiciled at their home with adequate police protection if required; and (b) ensuring that the victim and those accompanying them are provided with access to discreet waiting areas during the relevant court proceedings (6) All victims of crime shall have access to an appropriate person to liaise with relevant agencies on their behalf and to inform them about, and explain the progress, outcomes and impact of, their case (7) Witnesses under the age of 18 shall have access to a trained communications expert, to be known as a Registered Intermediary, to help them understand as necessary what is happening in the criminal proceedings (8) Victims of crime shall have access to transcripts of any relevant legal proceedings at no cost to themselves (9) Victims of crime shall have the right to attend and make representations to a pre-court hearing to determine the nature of the court proceedings (10) The Secretary of State must take steps to ensure that victims of crime— (a) have access to financial compensation from public funds for any detriment arising from the criminal case concerned; (b) are given the right to approve or refuse the payment of any compensation order made by a court against a person convicted of a crime against them; (c) have reimbursed to them, from public funds, any expenses incurred by them in attending in court and in any related legal process, whether in the UK or overseas; (d) have available to them legal advice where considered necessary by a judge in court proceedings; and (e) are not required to disclose personal data in legal proceedings which puts their safety at risk unless specifically ordered to do so by a judge.” New clause 35—Police etc. training: treatment of victims— “(1) The Secretary of State shall publish and implement a strategy for providing training on the impact of crime on victims and victims’ rights for staff of the following organisations— (a) the police (b) the Crown Prosecution Service, and (c) any other public agency or authority that the Secretary of State deems appropriate (2) The Secretary of State may also by regulation make provision for judges, barristers and solicitors involved in criminal cases involving sexual and domestic violence undertake specialist training (3) The Secretary of State shall publish an agreed timetable for the delivery and completion of the training required by this section.” New clause 36—Establishment and conduct of homicide reviews— “(1) In this section “homicide review” means a review of the circumstances a person aged 16 or over has, or appears to have, died as the result of a homicide and— (a) no one has been charged with the homicide, or (b) the person(s) charged has been acquitted (2) The Secretary of State may in a particular case direct a police force or other specified person or body or a person or body within subsection (5) to establish, or to participate in, a homicide review (3) It is the duty of any person or body within subsection (5) establishing or participating in a homicide review (whether or not held pursuant to a direction under subsection (2)) to have regard to any guidance and standards issued by the Commissioner for Victims and Witnesses as to the establishment and conduct of such reviews (4) Any reference in subsection (2) to the Secretary of State shall, in relation to persons and bodies within subsection (5)(b), be construed as a reference to the PSNI or Department of Justice in Northern Ireland as may be appropriate (5) The persons and bodies within this subsection are— (a) in relation to England and Wales—chief officers of police for police areas in England and Wales; local authorities; local probation boards established under section 4 of the Criminal Justice and Court Services Act 2000 (c 43); the National Health Service Commissioning Board; clinical commissioning groups established under section 14D of the National Health Service Act 2006; providers of probation services; Local Health Boards established under section 11 of the National Health Service (Wales) Act 2006; NHS trusts established under section 25 of the National Health Service Act 2006 or section 18 of the National Health Service (Wales) Act 2006; (b) in relation to Northern Ireland—the Chief Constable of the Police Service of Northern Ireland; the Probation Board for Northern Ireland; Health and Social Services Boards established under Article 16 of the Health and Personal Social Services (Northern Ireland) Order 1972 (SI 1972/1265 (NI 14)); Health and Social Services trusts established under Article 10 of the Health and Personal Social Services (Northern Ireland) Order 1991 (SI 1991/194 (NI 1)) (6) In subsection (5)(a) “local authority” means— (a) in relation to England, the council of a district, county or London borough, the Common Council of the City of London and the Council of the Isles of Scilly; (b) in relation to Wales, the council of a county or county borough.” New clause 37—Statutory duty on elected local policing bodies— “(1) An elected local policing body must assess— (a) the needs of victims in each elected local policing body’s police area, and (b) the adequacy and effectiveness of the available victims’ services in that area (2) An elected local policing body must— (a) prepare and consult upon an Area Victims’ Plan for its police area, (b) having taken account of any responses to its consultation and any Quality Standard, publish the Plan in such a manner as sets out clearly how the identified victim needs will be met by the available victims’ services, and (c) submit its Area Victims’ Plan to the Commissioner for Victims and Witnesses on an annual basis (3) In this section— “elected local policing body” and “police area” have the same meaning as in Part 1 of the Police Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011, and “Quality Standard” means the standard published under section 49(1)(f) of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004.” New clause 38—Duties of the Commissioner for Victims and Witnesses— “(1) Section 49 of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 (general functions of Commissioner) is amended as follows (2) In subsection (1), after paragraph (c) insert— “(d) assess the adequacy of each elected local policing body’s Area Victims’ Plans submitted to the Commissioner under section (Statutory duty on elected local policing bodies) of the Policing and Crime Act 2016, (e) make to elected local policing bodies such recommendations about submitted Area Victims’ Plans as the Commissioner considers necessary and appropriate; (f) prepare a statement of standards (the “Quality Standard”) in relation to the provision of victims’ services; (g) publish the Quality Standard in such manner as the Commissioner considers appropriate; (h) review the Quality Standard at intervals of not more than five years; (i) in preparing or reviewing a Quality Standard, consult the public, and for that purpose may publish drafts of the standard; (j) assess the steps taken to support victims and witnesses in giving evidence; (k) make such recommendations in relation to that assessment as the Commissioner considers necessary and appropriate; (l) issue guidance and standards for the establishment and conduct of homicide reviews under section (Establishment and conduct of homicide reviews) of the Policing and Crime Act 2016.”” New clause 39—National anti-doping provisions— “(1) Subsections (2) and (3) apply to— (a) all athletes participating in sport in the UK who are members of a governing body of sport or an affiliate organisation or licensee of a governing body of sport (including any clubs, teams, associations or leagues); (b) all athletes participating in such capacity in sporting events, competitions or other activities in the UK organised, convened, authorised or recognised by a governing body of sport or any of its member or affiliate organisations or licensees (including any clubs, teams, associations or leagues), wherever held; (c) any other athlete participating in sport in the UK who, by virtue of a contractual arrangement or otherwise, is subject to the jurisdiction of a governing body of sport for purposes of anti-doping; and (d) any person belonging to the entourage of an athlete, whether or not such person is a citizen of, or resident in, the United Kingdom (2) An athlete is guilty of an offence if he or she knowingly takes a prohibited substance with the intention, or one of the intentions, of enhancing his or her performance (3) A person belonging to the entourage of an athlete is guilty of an offence if he or she encourages or assists or hides awareness of the relevant athlete taking a prohibited substance with the intention, or one of the intentions, of enhancing such athlete’s performance (4) A medical professional commits an offence if they proscribe a prohibited substance to an athlete and believe, or ought reasonably to believe, that the substance will be used by the athlete to enhance their performance (5) For the purposes of this section a “prohibited substance” is as defined by the World Anti-Doping Agency (6) Any person guilty of an offence under subsection (2), (3) or (4) shall be liable— (a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or to both; or (b) On conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum or imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or to both (7) UK Anti-Doping shall discuss the following issues with the World Anti-Doping Agency annually— (a) the effectiveness of section 11 of the International Standard for Testing (athlete whereabouts requirements) and its harmonisation with EU privacy and working time rules and the European Convention on Human Rights; (b) the effectiveness of the international work of the World Anti-Doping Agency; and (c) progress on the development of a universal rollout of athlete biological passports (8) UK Anti-Doping shall submit the results of the annual discussions referred to in subsection (7) to the Secretary of State, who shall in turn— (a) lay before both Houses of Parliament an annual report documenting— (i) whether the athlete whereabouts requirements are effective in combating the abuse of drug-taking and in compliance with EU privacy and working time rules and the European Convention on Human Rights, and (ii) the performance of the World Anti-Doping Agency in general; and (b) determine whether the Government should remain a member and continue to support the World Anti-Doping Agency.” New clause 41—Local Safeguarding Children Board: prevention of child sexual exploitation— “(1) The Children Act 2004 is amended as follows (2) In section 14 after “children”, insert “and preventing child sexual exploitation, child abuse and child neglect.”” New clause 44—Modern technology: specialist digital unit (child abuse)— “(1) The chief officer of each police force in Wales and England must ensure that within their force there is a unit that specialises in analysing and investigating allegations of online offences against children and young people (2) The chief officer must ensure that such a unit has access to sufficient digital forensic science resource to enable it to perform this function effectively and efficiently.” New clause 46—Anonymity for victims who have private sexual photographs and films disclosed without their consent with intent to cause distress— “(1) Section 2 of the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1992 is amended as follows (2) In subsection (1), after paragraph (b) insert— (c) an offence under section 33 of the Criminal Courts and Justice Act 2015.” New clause 47—Compensation for victims who have private sexual photographs and films disclosed without their consent with intent to cause distress— “(1) Section 33 of the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015 is amended as follows (2) After subsection (9), insert— “(9A) The court may order a person guilty of an offence under this section to pay compensation to the victim of the offence, under sections 130 to 132 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 (9B) Compensation under subsection (9A) may be awarded for (among other things) any anxiety caused by the offence and any financial loss resulting from the offence.” New clause 60—Duty to report on Child Abduction Warning Notices— “(1) Each police force in England and Wales must report to the Secretary of State each year on— (a) the number of Child Abduction Warning Notices issued; (b) the number of Child Abduction Warning Notices breached; and (c) the number of Sexual Risk Orders and Sexual Harm Prevention Orders issued following the breach of a Child Abduction Warning Notice (2) The Secretary of State must prepare and publish a report each year on— (a) the number of Child Abduction Warning Notices issued in each police force in England and Wales; (b) the number of Child Abduction Warning Notices breached in each police force in England and Wales; and (c) the number of Sexual Risk Orders and Sexual Harm Prevention Orders issued following the breach of a Child Abduction Warning Notice in each police force in England and Wales and must lay a copy of the report before Parliament.” New clause 61—Disclosure of private sexual photographs and films without consent and with the intent to cause distress, fear or alarm, or recklessness as to distress, fear or alarm being caused— “(1) Section 33 of the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015 is amended as follows (2) In subsection (1) after “disclose” insert “or threaten to disclose” (3) In subsection (1)(b) after “distress” insert “fear or alarm or recklessness as to distress, fear or alarm being caused” (4) After subsection (1) insert— “(1A) It is also an offence to knowingly promote, solicit or profit from private photographs and films that are reasonably believed to have been disclosed without consent and with the intent to cause distress, fear or alarm, or recklessness as to distress, fear or alarm being caused” (5) Leave out subsection (8).” This new clause clarifies and expands the definition of the offence of disclosing private sexual photographs and films without consent and with the intent to cause distress, also known as revenge pornography, so that it includes reckless intent. This new clause also makes it an offence to knowingly promote, solicit or profit from private photographs and films that are reasonably believed to have been disclosed without consent. New clause 62—Meaning of “private” and “sexual”— “(1) Section 35 of the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015 is amended as follows (2) In subsection (3)(a) after “exposed genitals” insert “breasts, buttocks,” (3) Leave out subsection 4 (4) Leave out subsection 5.” This new clause expands the definition of “sexual” and ensures the disclosure of pornographic photoshopped images, posted with the intent to cause distress, fear or alarm or recklessness as to distress, fear or alarm being caused, are covered by the law. New clause 67—Misconduct in public office— “(1) A person commits an offence if— (a) the person is a public officer, (b) the person wilfully neglects to perform their duty or wilfully misconducts themselves in the performance of their public duty to such a degree as to amount to an abuse of the public‘s trust in the office holder, and (c) the person acts without reasonable excuse or justification (2) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable— (a) in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or, in relation to offences committed, to a fine, or to both; (b) in Northern Ireland, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or to both; (c) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or to a fine, or to both (3) For the purposes of this section, a public officer is an officer who discharges any duty in the discharge of which the public are interested and includes, but is not limited to— (a) executive or ministerial officers, (b) police officer, including a police officer in a period of suspension and a former police officer doing part-time police work, (c) constable, (d) special constable, (e) community support officer, (f) employee of a police force with responsibility for the computer system of that police force, (g) prison officer, (h) Independent Monitoring Board member, (i) nurse working within a prison, (j) coroner, (k) army officer, (l) accountant in the office of the Paymaster General, (m) Justice of the Peace (n) magistrate, (o) district judge, (p) clergy of the Church of England, (q) mayor, (r) local councillor, (s) employee of a local authority, and (t) civil servant or other employee of a public body.” This new clause seeks to codify the common law offence of misconduct in public office and prescribes a list of ‘public officers’ to which this offence shall apply Government amendments 107, 108, 111 to 116 and 119 to 122.

